ALIENS
In Star Wars, the bars are bustling with all types of alien creatures. And then, of course, there’s Yoda and Chewbacca. Recently, renowned scientist Stephen Hawking stated that he too believes aliens exist: “To my mathematical brain, the numbers alone make thinking about aliens perfectly rational.”Hawking thinks we should be cautious about interacting with aliens — that they might raid Earth’s resources, take our ores, and then move on like pirates. “I imagine they might exist in massive ships, having used up all the resources from their home planet. Such advanced aliens would perhaps become nomads, looking to conquer and colonize whatever planets they can reach.”But where are they all anyhow?For years, NASA and others have been searching for extraterrestrial intelligence. The universe is 13.7 billion years old and contains some 10 billion trillion stars. Surely, in this lapse of suns, advanced life would have evolved if it were possible. Yet despite half a century of scanning the sky, astronomers have failed to find any evidence of life or to pick up any of the interstellar radio signals that our great antennas should be able to easily detect.Some scientists point to the “Fermi Paradox,” noting that extraterrestrials should have had plenty of time to colonize the entire galaxy but that perhaps they’ve blown themselves up. It’s conceivable the problem is more fundamental and that the answer has to do with the evolutionary course of life itself.Look at the plants in your backyard. What are they but a stem with roots and leaves bringing nutriments to the organism? After billions of years of evolution, it was inevitable life would acquire the ability to locomote, to hunt and see, to protect itself from competitors. Observe the ants in the woodpile — they can engage in combat just as resolutely as humans. Our guns and ICBM are merely the mandibles of a cleverer ant. The effort for self-preservation is vague and varied. But when we’ve overcome our struggles, what do we do next? Build taller and more splendid houses?What happens after life completes its transition to perfection? Perhaps across space, more advanced intelligences have taken the next evolutionary step. Perhaps they’ve evolved beyond the three dimensions we vertebrates know. A new theory — Biocentrism — tells us that space and time aren’t physical matrices, but simply tools our mind uses to put everything together. These algorithms are the key to consciousness, and why space and time — indeed the properties of matter itself — are relative to the observer. More advanced civilizations would surely understand these algorithms well enough to create realities that we can’t even imagine, and to have expanded beyond our corporeal cage.Like breathing, we take for granted how our mind puts everything together. I can recall a dream I had of a flying saucer landing in Times Square. It was so real it took awhile to convince myself that it was a dream (that I was actually at home in bed). I was standing in a crowd surrounded by skyscrapers when a massive spaceship appeared overhead. Everyone started running. My mind had somehow generated this spatio-temporal experience out of electrochemical information. I could feel the vibrations under my feet as the ship started to land, merging this 3D world with my inner thoughts and sensations.Although I was in bed with my eyes closed, I was able to run and move my arms and fingers. My mind had created a fully functioning body and placed it in a virtual world (replete with clouds in the sky and the Sun) that was indistinguishable from the one I’m in right now. Life as we know it is defined by this spatial-temporal logic, which traps us in the universe of up and down. But like my dream, quantum theory confirms that the properties of particles in the “real” world are also observer-determined.Other information systems surely exist that correspond to other physical realities, universes based on logic completely different from ours and not based on space and time as we know it. In fact, the simplest invertebrates may only experience existence in one dimension of space. Evolutionary biology suggests life has progressed from a one dimensional reality, to two dimensions to three dimensions, and there’s no scientific reason to think that the evolution of life stops there.Advanced civilizations would certainly have changed the algorithms so that instead of being trapped in the linear dimensions we find ourselves in, their consciousness moves through the multiverse and beyond. Why would Aliens build massive ships and spend thousands of years to colonize planetary systems (most of which are probably useless and barren), when they could simply tinker with the algorithms and get whatever they want?Life on Earth is just beginning to send its shoots upward into the heavens. We’ve even flung a piece of metal outside the solar system. Affixed to the spacecraft is a record with greetings in 60 languages. One can’t but wonder whether some civilization more advanced than ours will come upon it. Or will it just drift across the gulf of space? To me the answer is clear. But in case I’m wrong, I have a pitch fork guarding the ore in my backyard.Robert Lanza has published extensively in leading scientific journals. His book “Biocentrism” lays out the scientific argument for his theory of everything.In the last century people from all around the world have been theorising about the possible existence of alien like beings. This is an idea that has met heavy resistance by sceptics and non-believers who rely on evidence and hard facts to confirm the existence of such creatures. The thought of aliens watching over us and abducting humans randomly for genetic testing has created a mixture of fear and doubt worldwide. The thought of aliens also causes confusion to people who find it hard to picture what an alien civilisation would be like and how it would differ to earth.The human race has managed to exhaust the resource of its planet in less than two centuries of industry, provoking massive pollution and climate change. Is there any hope that our space brothers will come and teach us the cosmic wisdom or are we bound to destruction or invasion by an advanced extraterrestrial civilization?Ufos have been notorious for stopping automobiles at close range. It is relatively common for a motorist, cruising down the highway, to have his engine sputter, lose power, or stop running. At night, the headlights frequently grow dim or go out completely. Also, static is heard on the redio, and it may stop playing. The driver stops at the side of the road and gets out to search for the cause. Only then does he notice a large, glowing disc nearby, commonly hovering at low altitude over his car.These effects are not limited to automobiles, but occur with all kinds of vehicles that are powered by internal combustion engines, except "diesels.Incidents of engine interference or failure have been reported for aircraft, motorcycles, trucks, buses, power mowews, tractors, and other farm machinery.In all cases, the engines ran normally affter the UFO had departed. Driving close to power transmission lines which operate at 60 cycles/second usually cause static on the radio without affecting the lights and engine. The implication is clear: the mechanism of the UFO interference is something other than low frequency, "electromagnetic radiation".UFO sightings and other incidents dealing with alleged extraterrestrial life forms are often accompanied by sightings of black helicopters and disks. On occasion UFO witnesses report the presence of black helicopters in the area, sometimes even in pursuit of the unidentified flying object.  Some theorize these black helicopters are manned by government agents who are involved in suppressing UFO evidence.  Others, however, suggest that the force behind these black helicopters are a cabal of domestic and international parties (and maybe even aliens themselves) whose real intent is far more nefarious than a mere UFO cover-up.  These online resources examine the black helicopter phenomenon and expound of the meaning of black helicopter sightings.In a documented "mystery helicopter" wave in England, accounts place Oriental-appearing occupants in an unidentified chopper. Slant-eyed, olive skinned, Oriental-seeming occupants have been a staple at the heart and at the periphery of UFO accounts for years. Significant numbers of the infamous Men In Black (MIB) have a similar appearance, but very often they are
seen as very pale and gaunt men who are sensitive to light.There also has been speculation that they are involved in biological experiments with chemical or biological warfare or the geobotanical pursuit of petroleum and mineral deposits.
In STIGMATA No. 5 (Fall-Winter 1978) Tom Adams outlined the most prominent speculative explanations accounting for the mutilation/helicopter link, including the following:
The helicopters are themselves UFOs, disguised to appear as terrestrial craft.The choppers originate from within the U.S. government/military and are directly involved in conducting the actual mutilations.The helicopters are government/military and are not involved in the mutilations but are investigating them.The helicopters are government/military, and they know about the identity and motives of the  mutilators and by their presence, they are trying to divert attention to the possibility of involvement by the military.The answer, as far as Tom Adams is concerned, could be a combination of the above explanations.Throughout the world there have been reports that allege that cattle have been killed and mutilated under mysterious circumstances. The dead cattle have had all their blood drained from their body and various parts removed with surgical precision. Some researchers believe that the cattle mutilations are the result of extra terrestrials; while the skeptics believe it to be a case of satanic cults or natural predators. Ranchers have lost thousands of dollars from these cattle mutilations and local authorities have conducted extensive investigations. To this day the identity of the perpetrators and their reason for mutilating the cattle remains a mystery.Most commonly, mutilated animals are cattle, but horses, goats, even deer and house-hold pets have been found dead although the cause of death is undetermined.Often their reproductive and rectal organs as well other body parts such as one or both eyes, heart, tongue, ears and bones have been removed. In some cases the incisions were made by cutting between the cells, a process we are not yet capable of performing in the field. In many of the mutilations there was no blood found at all in the carcass, yet there was no vascular collapse of the internal organs.  From some of the evidence it is apparent that this surgery is accomplished, in most cases, while the victim, animal or human, is still alive.In most cases, the animal is completely drained of blood, with only a few drops or none at all located around the carcass. Organs are sometimes liquefied, and dead flies are found on the body. Other (living) animals (including scavengers/carrion eaters) will avoid the carcass, acting extremely nervous or distressed around it.Investigators have reported a strange chemical smell associated with the mutilated cattle and the carcass being covered with a white powder. Equally puzzling is the fact that there are no tracts of predators, vehicles or footprints leading to or from the carcass, even when the ground was soft after rain. The lack of tracks or blood trails and clamp marks on the animals' legs suggests that the cattle were taken to another location and killed. After being mutilated, the cattle were then dropped in the general area from where they were abducted.A lack of predation signs (including teethmarks, tearing of the skin or flesh, or animal footprints) on or around the carcass.Lack of obvious scavenging. Other cattle avoid the carcass and the area where it's fo The ground under the animal appears depressed, as if the animal was dropped on the site from a height leaving an impact crater. The animal's bones found to be fractured with injuries consistent with being dropped.Eyewitness reports of aerial objects in the vicinity of cattle at the time of an animal going missingThe removal of and the cutting of flesh and bone appears to be done with surgical precision and often the incisions have been cauterized which has led some investigators to suggest that the perpetrators are using some form of laser. This technology was not available when the first mutilations were reported.For the first time that tissue gathered from mutilator cuts in Arkansas on March 11, 1989, revealed the following characteristics under microscopic examination:The line is pinpoint thin;The line was subjected to high heat, probably 300 degrees Fahrenheit or above, leaving a hard and darkened edge;The cuts were made rapidly, probably in two minutes or less, because there is no inflammatory cell destruction which typically begins in a few minutes after any trauma to tissue
The removal of major organs (such as heart or liver) with no obvious entry/excision marks. Often, if the heart is missing, apart from no excision wound, the Pericardium will still be present and intact, with the heart missing.In many of the mutilations there was no blood found at all in the carcass, yet there was no vascular collapse of the internal organs.  From some of the evidence it is apparent that this surgery is accomplished, in most cases, while the victim, animal or human, is still alive.In most cases, the animal is completely drained of blood, with only a few drops or none at all located around the carcass. Organs are sometimes liquefied, and dead flies are found on the body. Other (living) animals (including scavengers/carrion eaters) will avoid the carcass, acting extremely nervous or distressed around it.
Investigators have reported a strange chemical smell associated with the mutilated cattle and the carcass being covered with a white powder. Equally puzzling is the fact that there are no tracts of predators, vehicles or footprints leading to or from the carcass, even when the ground was soft after rain. The lack of tracks or blood trails and clamp marks on the animals' legs suggests that the cattle were taken to another location and killed. After being mutilated, the cattle were then dropped in the general area from where they were abducted.A lack of predation signs (including teethmarks, tearing of the skin or flesh, or animal footprints) on or around the carcass.Lack of obvious scavenging. Other cattle avoid the carcass and the area where it's foThe ground under the animal appears depressed, as if the animal was dropped on the site from a height leaving an impact crater. The animal's bones found to be fractured with injuries consistent with being dropped.Eyewitness reports of aerial objects in the vicinity of cattle at the time of an animal going missingThe removal of and the cutting of flesh and bone appears to be done with surgical precision and often the incisions have been cauterized which has led some investigators to suggest that the perpetrators are using some form of laser. This technology was not available when the first mutilations were reported.For the first time that tissue gathered from mutilator cuts in Arkansas on March 11, 1989, revealed the following characteristics under microscopic examination:
The line is pinpoint thin;The line was subjected to high heat, probably 300 degrees Fahrenheit or above, leaving a hard and darkened edge;The cuts were made rapidly, probably in two minutes or less, because there is no inflammatory cell destruction which typically begins in a few minutes after any trauma to tissue The removal of major organs (such as heart or liver) with no obvious entry/excision marks. Often, if the heart is missing, apart from no excision wound, the Pericardium will still be present and intact, with the heart missing.In many of the mutilations there was no blood found at all in the carcass, yet there was no vascular collapse of the internal organs.  From some of the evidence it is apparent that this surgery is accomplished, in most cases, while the victim, animal or human, is still alive.In most cases, the animal is completely drained of blood, with only a few drops or none at all located around the carcass. Organs are sometimes liquefied, and dead flies are found on the body. Other (living) animals (including scavengers/carrion eaters) will avoid the carcass, acting extremely nervous or distressed around it.Investigators have reported a strange chemical smell associated with the mutilated cattle and the carcass being covered with a white powder. Equally puzzling is the fact that there are no tracts of predators, vehicles or footprints leading to or from the carcass, even when the ground was soft after rain. The lack of tracks or blood trails and clamp marks on the animals' legs suggests that the cattle were taken to another location and killed. After being mutilated, the cattle were then dropped in the general area from where they were abducted.A lack of predation signs (including teethmarks, tearing of the skin or flesh, or animal footprints) on or around the carcass.Lack of obvious scavenging. Other cattle avoid the carcass and the area where it's fo The ground under the animal appears depressed, as if the animal was dropped on the site from a height leaving an impact crater. The animal's bones found to be fractured with injuries consistent with being dropped.Eyewitness reports of aerial objects in the vicinity of cattle at the time of an animal going missing The removal of and the cutting of flesh and bone appears to be done with surgical precision and often the incisions have been cauterized which has led some investigators to suggest that the perpetrators are using some form of laser. This technology was not available when the first mutilations were reported.For the first time that tissue gathered from mutilator cuts in Arkansas on March 11, 1989, revealed the following characteristics under microscopic examination:The line is pinpoint thin;
The line was subjected to high heat, probably 300 degrees Fahrenheit or above, leaving a hard and darkened edge;The cuts were made rapidly, probably in two minutes or less, because there is no inflammatory cell destruction which typically begins in a few minutes after any trauma to tissueThe removal of major organs (such as heart or liver) with no obvious entry/excision marks. Often, if the heart is missing, apart from no excision wound, the Pericardium will still be present and intact, with the heart missing.In 1967, when the Pueblo Chieftain in Pueblo, Colorado published a story about a horse named Lady who was mutilated in mysterious circumstances, which was then picked up by the wider press and distributed nationwide. In the Fall of 1973, farmers in started Minnesota and Kansas reporting mutilated cattle and in 1976, 15 states, from Montana and South Dakota in the north, to New Mexico and Texas in the south.The circumstances surrounding the deaths were different then anything the local police had ever investigated. At this time, the blame for the mutilations was placed on Satanic cults. Soon, reports of cattle mutilations spread throughout the Midwest United States and even into Canada.  The cattle mutilation phenomena claimed the lives of over 10,000 head of cattle by 1979. Colorado, Wyoming, Texas, Alabama, Puerto Rico, Canada, and as far away as South America, have been home to such mutilations. The purpose of these grotesque and strange occurrences still remains a mystery.  The first human victim was Sgt. Jonathan P. Louette at the White Sands Missile Test Range in 1956, who was found three days after an Air Force Major had witnessed his abduction by a "disk shaped" object at 03:00 while on a search for missile debris downrange.  His genitals had been removed, rectum cored out in a surgically precise "plug" up to the colon, eyes removed and all blood removed with, again, no vascular collapse.In 1998, a documented photographic evidence emerged that involved a human being being mutilated outside of Sao Paulo, Brazil. An autopsy report concluded the procedure occurred while the victim was still alive, and the associated pain resulted in cardiac arrest. The victim's identity was kept private.Satanic Cults Police agencies in Alberta, Idaho, Montana, and Iowa did link some mutilation cases to satanic cults and ritual sacrifices. However, police investigating this theory found little supporting evidence and often ran into dead ends. The problem with this theory is that the mutilations are too widespread, span 30 years, and would require a large amount of resources to be executed throughout the world.Government Conspiracy Black, unmarked, helicopters with tinted windows and powerful searchlights are often seen during a cattle mutilation wave. Conspiracy theorists believe the government is conducting top secret chemical warfare experiments. 
On April 8, 1979, three police officers in Dulce, New Mexico, reported a mysterious aircraft which resembled a U.S. military helicopter hovering around a site following a wave of mutilation which claimed 16 cows. On July 15, 1974, two unregistered helicopters, a white helicopter and a black twin-engine aircraft, opened fire on Robert Smith Jr. while he was driving his tractor on his farm in Honey Creek, Iowa. This attack followed a rash of mutilations in the area and across the nearby border in Nebraska. The reports of "helicopter" involvement have been used to explain why some cattle appear to have been "dropped" from considerable height.The weakness of this theory is that the government would have access to their own stock of cattle and would not necessarily need to use random cattle belonging to civilians. Also, the phenomenais too global to be conducted by any one government.Strange animalsThe first mutilation was reported in Colorado in September of 1967; the same year that Mothman terrorized and mutilated cattle in West Virginia, and a decade before the Chupacabra would be blamed for draining the blood and mutilating goats and livestock in Puerto Rico. So far none of these cryptids have been captured or photographed.Scavenging animals/predators
The Colorado Bureau of Investigation examined over 200 mutilation reports and concluded that the majority were caused by scavenging animals. They suggest that scavengers like ants and vultures go first for the softest dead tissue like the lips, eyes and rectum. They argue that once the cow's heart stops pumping the blood will flow to and coagulate in the lowest portion of the body giving it an appearance of being drained of all blood.However, the way in which the animal died is inconsistent with how a predator would kill it. Unlike animal attack, the flesh, adjoining the area where it has been removed, is smooth and clean as if cut with a searing or laser scalpel. As well, the areas chosen for removal are quite strange. Mainly the sexual, anterior digestive tract and sensory organs are affected. Also, no carrion eaters will touch the mutilated cow even though it has plenty of flesh still left to be eaten.Extraterrestrial experiments
The absence of tracks, the mysterious nature of the act, and the coinciding UFO reports preceding mutilations suggest this is a sinister plan performed by aliens. Evidence at the scene of a mutilation suggest that the cattle were taken elsewhere by air, mutilated, and then dropped back near to where they were taken. UFOs are usually seen in the vicinity of cattle mutilations, and cattle are deathly afraid of them. Some ranchers have even reported seeing a UFO abducting the cattle in their fields.There are more evidences to support this theory: cattle mutilations often occur in UFO Hotspots such as Northern New Mexico, and near Area 51, Nevada and two separate alien abductees have reported, under regressive hypnosis, seeing cattle taken into the alien craft and mutilated.Various speculative theories have been proposed for the reason of such mutilation such as possible specific nutrient requisites, hormone procurement, species propagation (reproduction), and rote experimentation on mammalian populations.UFO researcher Phillip S Duke even suggested that aliens have been using commercial cattle stocks to incubate and research the HIV/AIDS virus. He also speculates that mutilations of the ear are the result of aliens removing tracking implants. However, this theory is inconsistent with the origin of AIDS which has more likely be transmitted through zoonosis from primates who have higher genetic similarity to humans than cows.To eliminate the possibility that a UFO report is a hoax, one must examine the credibility of the witnesses, the details of the report, and any physical evidence, especially photographs. The reliability and validity of these factors must be ascertained before a researcher can have confidence in the data. A witness's reliability can be checked by interviewing neighbors, friends, relatives, co-workers, and other associates. In particular, an investigator is interested in determining whether the individual has a reputation as a sincere, responsible person, or as a practical joker, prankster, or hoaxer. The researcher also examines the UFO report to determine if there are any unbelievable claims or glaring inconsistencies. For example, are there elements in the report similar to those found in science fiction or so unusual that they do not appear in other UFO accounts? Does the witness claim to have seen the UFO many times, although other witnesses cannot be found? Does the witness claim that important evidence is mysteriously missing or taken by unknown "government agents"? While such facts may not prove a hoax, they can cast doubt on the report and must be considered during the investigation. Finally, the UFO investigator must examine the evidence to check if it has been altered, falsified, or hoaxed. If the evidence looks faked, or if it can be explained by more prosaic methods, doubt is cast on its validity. Often an experienced ufologist can determine that a UFO photograph is a hoax upon first viewing. Clues, such as a noticeable difference between the sharpness of the UFO image and that of foreground and background objects, can indicate a hoax. Computerized photo enhancement can also be used to prove a hoax. Enhancement techniques can reveal supporting strings or wires and can provide information about an object's actual shape, material, and density.Remember, in any investigation you must critically and thoroughly examine the evidence. The more evidence that is proven to be unreliable, the greater the doubt to be cast on the validity of the UFO event. A rule-of-thumb to consider when investigating any UFO case is if something appears too good to be true, it probably is too good to be true." The alien and UFO phenomenon is so widespread and present in our modern times that it looks difficult to make even a cautious opinion. This monstrous category includes such various items as abduction, unknown races, crop circles, strange lights in the sky and a formal synthesis of the origin of such a wide array of phenomenon is almost impossible. Here, we will examine evidences, theories scientifically as well as esoterically.The mediocrity, also known as the Copernican principle, states that since life originated on Earth, a similar process is likely to happen or already happened elsewhere in the cosmos, where the same molecules exist and the same laws of physics probably apply. This idea was reenforced by Edwin Hubble's discovery that the universe is substantially larger than humans first thought. Earth is a landa planet in a typical planetary system, located in an unexceptional region of a common barred-spiral galaxy.  Frank Drake and Carl Sagan have been the main supporters of this theory.The mediocrity principle also applies to humanity since recent discoveries suggests that all humans have a common ancestor about 100,000 years ago, and that they share a common ancestor with chimpanzees and bonobos about six million years ago.In his book, COSMOS, Dr. Sagan indicates that  there are about Ten Million (10,000,000) suchtechnologically advanced civilizations in our galaxy. The rare earth hypothesis is the contrary of the principle of mediocrity, advocated by Carl Sagan and Frank Drake, among others. It argues that the emergence of complex multicellular life on Earth required an improbable combination of astrophysical and geological events and circumstances. The term "Rare Earth" comes from Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Universe (2000), a book by Peter Ward, a geologist and paleontologist, and Donald E. Brownlee, an astronomer and astrobiologist, both from the University of Washington. According to the Rare Earth hypothesis, the emergence of complex life requires a number of fortuitous circumstances such as a galactic habitable zone, a central star and planetary system having the requisite character, the circumstellar habitable zone, the size of the planet, the advantage of a large satellite, conditions needed to assure the planet has a magnetosphere and plate tectonics, the chemistry of the lithosphere, atmosphere, and oceans, the role of "evolutionary pumps" such as massive glaciation and rare bolide impacts, and whatever led to the still mysterious Cambrian explosion of animal phyla. The emergence of intelligent life may have required yet other rare events that are still unknown.In order for a small rocky planet to support complex life, Ward and Brownlee argue, the values of several variables must fall within narrow ranges. The universe is so vast that it could contain many Earth-like planets. But if such planets exist, they are likely to be separated from each other by many thousands of light years. Such distances may preclude communication among any intelligent species evolving on such planets, which would solve the Fermi paradox: "If extraterrestrial aliens are common, why aren't they obvious".•Proper distance from the star. If a planet orbits its sun too closely or too far away, liquid water would not exist. There isn't much margin for error here: a change of 5 to 15 percent in Earth's distance from the Sun would lead to the freezing, or boiling, of all water on Earth.Proper distance from the center of the galaxy. The density of stars near the center of the galaxy is so high, that the amount of cosmic radiation in that area would prevent the development of life.A star of a proper mass. A too-massive star would emit too much ultra-violet energy, preventing the development of life. A star that is too small would require the planet to be closer to it (in order to maintain liquid water). But such a close distance would result in tidal locking (where one face of the planet constantly faces the star, and the other always remains dark -- as with the moon in its orbit around Earth). In this case one side becomes too hot, the other too cold, and the planet's atmosphere escapes.A proper mass. A planet that is too small will not be able to maintain any atmosphere. A planet that is too massive would attract a larger number of asteroids, increasing the chances of life-destroying cataclysms.
•Oceans. The ability to maintain liquid water does not automatically imply that there will be any on the planet's surface. It looks like Earth acquired its own water from asteroids made of ice that crashed here billions of years ago. On the other hand, too much water (i.e., a planet with little or no land) will lead to an unstable atmosphere, unfit for maintaining life.A constant energy output from the star. If the star's energy output suddenly decreases, even for a relatively short while, all the water on the planet would freeze. This situation is irreversible, since when the star resumes its normal energy output, the planet's now-white surface will reflect most of this energy, and the ice will never melt. Conversely, if the stars energy output increases for a short while, all the oceans will evaporate and the result would be an irreversible greenhouse-effect, preventing the oceans from reforming.Successful evolution. Even if all of these conditions hold, and simple life evolves (which probably happens even if some of these conditions aren't met), this still does not imply that the result is animal (multi-cellular) life. The evolution of life on Earth included some surprising leaps; two worth mentioning are the move from simple, single-cellular life to cells which contain internal organs, and the appearance of calcium-based skeletons. It appears like the first of these leaps took more time than the evolution from complex single-celled life to full-blown humans.Avoiding disasters. Any number of disasters can lead to the complete extinction of all life on a planet. This include the supernova of a nearby star; a massive asteroid impact (like the one that probably caused the extinction of dinosaurs, and 70% of all other life-forms at the time); drastic changes of climate; and so on.There are also a few attributes that seem, at first, to be completely unrelated to life and not required for its development. Ward and Brownlee argue strongly for the importance of the following attributes:Mars. W&B argue that the fossil record shows that the cooling Earth developed bacterial life as soon as conditions permitted. They suggest that this may be because the bacteria first developed on Mars, which cooled earlier, and that perhaps Earth was then seeded with these bacteria carried by meteorites reaching Earth after having been ejected from Mars by asteroid impacts. The low gravity of Mars makes this more likely, and it is estimated that 10% of meteors ejected from Mars may impact Earth. A system lacking a Mars-like planetary companion might have been slower to develop bacterial life.
•Bolid impacts. The impact of a sufficiently massive asteroid or comet can act as an evolutionary pump. The evolution of complex life requires long periods of tranquility. Frequent impacts from large bolides, while not incompatible with the emergence and survival of microbes, make it unlikely that complex life will emerge and survive. Rare bolide impacts, however, while making many forms of complex life extinct, on balance appear to act as evolutionary pumps. A small number of mass-extinction events may be required to give evolution the chance to develop radical new responses to the challenges of the environment, rather than remain trapped in a suboptimal local maximum. By "suboptimal" is meant "the likelihood that human-like intelligence will eventually emerge is not at a maximum." A case in point is the asteroid impact that created the Chicxulub Crater, believed to have triggered the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event, when an estimated 70% of extant metazoans species, including all dinosaurs, became extinct. By removing dinosaurs from all niches they happened to fill, the K-T extinction opened the way for mammals to become large and take their place.
•The existence of a Jupiter-like planet in the system. Apparently, Jupiter's large mass attracted many of the asteroids that would have otherwise hit Earth. Could life evolve in a system with no Jovian planet? On the other hand, too many Jovian planets, or one that is too large, could lead to a non-stable solar system, sending the smaller planets into the central sun or ejecting them into the cold of space.The existence of a large, nearby moon. Apparently Luna, Earth's moon, is atypically large and close. Both of Mars's moons, for example, are minor rocks by comparison. What does this have to do with life? Well, it turns out that Luna kept (and still keeps) Earth's tilt stable. Without Luna, the tilt would have changed drastically over time, and no stable climate could exist. If the tilt would have stabilized on a too-large or too-small value, the results could also be disastrous; Earth's tilt is “just right”.
•Plate tectonics. Surprisingly enough, it seems like plate tectonics are required for maintaining a stable atmosphere.  When the temperature of Earth interior rises too high, plate tectonics cause the capture of carbon dioxide into rocks, reducing the greenhouse effect and producing cooling. When the temperature falls, the opposite happens and less carbon dioxide goes into rocks, producing warming. A planet without plate tectonics would lack this temperature regulation mechanism. Without a stable temperature, the evolution of complex life becomes more unlikely.The Rare Earth equation is Ward and Brownlee's riposte to the Drake equation. It calculates N, the number of Earth-like planets in the Milky Way having complex life forms, as:Here N* is the number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy, fp is the fraction of stars with planets, fpm is the fraction of planets that are metal-rich, ne is the average number of planets in the star's habitable zone, ng is the number of stars in the galactic habitable zone, fi is the fraction of habitable planets where life does arise, fc is the fraction of planets where complex metazoans arise, fl is the fraction of the total lifetime of the planet that is marked by the presence of complex metazoans, fm is the fraction of planets with a large moon, fj is the fraction of solar systems with Jupiter-size planets, and fme is the fraction of planets with a critically low number of extinction events. In the rest of this column, I want to discuss the terms in this Rare Earth equation one by one, and then discuss some of the other factors not in the equation that may turn out to be important.N*(stars) - Estimating the number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy is tricky, because we don't know our galaxy's mass very well, and there is little information about the population of very small stars. N* is roughly 500 billion stars of all classes.fp (planets) - In 1995 astronomers discovered the first planets orbiting other stars. Since then more and more planets have been discovered. However, it is not clear what fraction of the stars in the galaxy actually have sizable planets.fpm (metal) - One interesting correlation stands out among the existing observations of extra-solar planets. All of the observed planets orbit metal-rich stars. This suggests that planets, or at least planets large enough to have been observed so far, may not be all that common and may be peculiar to the subset of stars that are rich in metals.ne (habitable zone) - The orbit of Earth happens to be "just right", falling in a narrow habitable zone of orbit distances in which a planet not only has liquid water now, but also had liquid water several billion years ago when the Sun was cooler and life first formed. W&B mention a 1993 estimate indicating that if Earth's orbit was 5% smaller or 15% larger it would not be in this habitable zone. This zone shrinks for more massive stars because of their more rapid evolution and for less massive stars because the zone of liquid water itself in narrower. Thus the average number of planets in habitable zones, averaged over all stars in the galaxy may be very small indeed.ng (galactic zone) - The Solar System is about 25,000 light years from the galactic center, roughly a third of the distance from the center to the outside edge. This position is fortunate. Stars too close in have too may close neighbors that disturb the system's orbits, too much fireworks from neighbor supernovas, and too much radiation that comes from the galactic center. Stars too far out are too deficient in the heavy elements cooked up in supernovas near the galactic center.fi (life) - W&B suggest that the fraction of habitable planets where life does arise, at least in the form of bacteria, may be large. Geological evidence suggests that bacteria were present on the Earth as early as planetary conditions made it possible for them to exist. This view is also supported by observation of living bacteria from rock extracted from very deep wells and mines. The controversial claim that bacteria fossils may have been observed in meteorites of Martian origin found in the Antarctic, if true, also supports this idea.fc (complex metazoans) - W&B argue that the fraction of planets with bacterial life where complex metazoans arise may be very small. They base this view on the observation that for four fifths of the time since life first appeared on the Earth, some 2.5 billion years ago, there was only bacterial life. They also point out that the Cambrian Explosion, when complex metazoans first appeared, was preceded by some extraordinary climactic and geological events that may have triggered it.fl (planet lifetime) - Even if complex metazoans arise, their development, as indicated above, may take a long time. Finding complex life on another planet depends on the size of this time window.fm (large moon) - Except for the Earth's moon, the satellites of the Solar System have only a tiny fraction of the mass of their primary. Mercury and Venus have no satellites at all. The moons of Mars, Phobos and Demios, are small rocks with masses of only 27 and 5 billionths of the mass of Mars. Even the rather large moons of Jupiter and Saturn have masses of only a few parts in 105 of their planet's mass. Our Moon, on the other hand, has 1.2% of Earth's mass. This raises the question of how Earth could have acquired such a large satellite. The prevailing explanation is that a random collision occurred between the just-forming Earth and a Mars-size object, with Earth capturing most of the mass from that collision while about 1% of the debris coalesced into our Moon. Such an event is very unlikely, which suggests that most Earth-size planets will not have moons with anything approaching 1% of the planet's mass.An important consequence of our giant Moon is that it stabilizes the 23º tilt of the Earth's rotational axis with respect to its orbital plane. Geological evidence indicates that over many millions of years the tilt of the Earth's axis has stayed within a few degrees of its present value. Recent calculations have shown that without the Moon, the gravitational effects of Jupiter and the Sun would have caused the Earth's tilt to wander chaotically over a wide range, producing enormous changes in climate and a hostile environment for the development of complex life.fj (Jupiter) - W&B argue that if Jupiter (300 times more massive that Earth) were removed from the Solar System, the frequency of comet and asteroid impacts on the Earth would increase by a factor of about 10,000. A major asteroid strike capable of significant extinction of species is estimated to occur in an average time interval of about 100 million years. If Jupiter were not present or was in a significantly different orbit, this interval might increase to one strike every 10,000 years, impeding the development of complex life.fme (extinctions) - Since the evolution of bacterial life on Earth some 2.5 billion years ago, there have been no extinction events large enough to sterilize the planet. W&B argue that this critically low number of extinction events may be unusual. The fossil record shows that there have been some very severe events, the most recent of which was the asteroid strike 65 million years ago that killed the dinosaurs as well as much of the life in the oceans. W&B argue that a very stable planetary system is required, which nearly circular orbits for all of the outer planets, for this condition to exist. An accident such as the gravitational perturbation of a passing star could easily destroy this delicate stability.The Rare Earth equation, unlike the Drake equation, does not factor the probability that complex life evolves into intelligent life that discovers technology (Ward and Brownlee are not evolutionary biologists). There are a number of odds in the evolution process, for example, the large brains of humans have marked adaptive disadvantages, requiring as they do an expensive metabolism, a long gestation period, and a childhood lasting more than 25% of the average total life span. Other improbable features of humans include:
Being the only extant bipedal land (non-avian) vertebrate. Combined with an unusual eye–hand coordination, this permits dextrous manipulations of the physical environment with the hands;A vocal apparatus far more expressive than that of any other mammal, enabling speech. Speech makes it possible for humans to interact cooperatively, to share knowledge, and to acquire a culture;The capability of formulating abstractions to a degree permitting the invention of mathematics, and the discovery of science and technology. Only recently did humans acquire anything like their current scientific and technological sophistication.There has always been discussion about the close encounters of the third kind aliens. As far as sightings are concerned, aliens come in all shapes and sizes, from the little green men of Kelly, Kentucky to the 10 foot tall giants of Voronezh, Russia. Some of these seem to be living, breathing beings, and yet some appear to have characteristics of a robot.Most of us picture alien life the way it's portrayed in movies, where aliens are commonly depicted as human-like forms because they use actors either to play the roles directly in make-up or to be models for computer-generated animation. Also, audiences relate to human-like aliens better than to more exotic, monster-like creatures.It is up to the reader to come to their own conclusions concerning the plausibility of the existence of the specific 'alien' groups mentioned in the paragraphs below, based on their own review of the evidence and documentation contained in the accompanying files.Alien incidents involve real encounter of so called 'aliens' on a massive scale. It is often the case when the UFO that carries the aliens is crashing on Earth. There are numerous cases in recent history but we will focus on the most notorious. Shall the truth be revealed.The history of UFO and aliens conspiracy theories is full of references to mysterious governmental organizations that seems to cover up the existence of UFO. On the other hand, the growing awareness of alien and UFO phenomena around the world has coincided with the advent of UFO and alien cults, sects and religious groups. These groups typically have a doctrine that extensively integrates a role for an alien and/or UFO presence in their belief system.George Adamski was the first alien "contactee" to build a worldwide following in the 1950. The contactee movement was fairly amorphous until it gained a more solid, cultlike form in the Aetherians (a group founded by a British mystic who claimed to communicate with the Cosmic Master Aetherius) and later, Heaven's Gate and the Raelians. But Roswell enthusiasts are inevitably lumped together with predatory cults, according to Eugene Taylor, Ph.D., Harvard historian and author of Shadow Culture: Psychology and Spirituality in America. Typically formed around a single person, sects of alien believers peaked in popularity at the height of the New Age movement in the 1980s and most recently made the headlines in a sinister way.Followers of the Heaven's Gate sect committed suicide to join forces with a UFO heralded by the Hale-Bopp comet in 1997. A group known as the Order of the Solar Temple staged mass suicides in Europe and Canada during the 1990s; members planned to relocate to a satellite of the star Sirius.This is not to say that all so-called UFO cults are self-destructive. Many have origins in benign gatherings of alien enthusiasts, so-called "client cults" in which individuals--many with New Age leanings--follow a charismatic figure, minus the indoctrination and brainwashing. The Raelian movement is thought to be among the last of a dozen or so left. "What they've done is melded together what is probably the single-best known religious mythology in the Western world, which is Christianity, with UFOs," said Douglas Cowan, a religious studies professor at the University of Missouri-Kansas City.Majestic Twelve (MJ-12) is allegedly a secret organization whose job is to research, contact and maintain communication with extra terrestrial intelligence. US President Truman allegedly created Majestic-12 in 1947 to find answers to the massive amount of UFO sightings. The original members were: Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter, Dr. Vannevar Bush, Secretary James Forrestal, General Nathan P. Twining, General Hoyt S. Vandenburg, Dr. Detlev Bronk, Dr. Jerome Hunsaker, Mr. Sidney W. Souers, Mr. Gordon Gray, Dr. Donald Menzel, General Robert M. Montague, and Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner. Although the group exists today, none of the original members are still alive.  The last one to die was Gordon Gray, former Secretary of the Army, in 1984.The Majority Agency for Joint Intelligence (MAJI) was created by MJ-12 to coordinate efforts to recover, study and communicate with extra terrestrial intelligence. MAJI reports directly to the MJ-12 group who in turn reports only to the US president. MJ-1 is the designation for the director of MAJI and this individual is reported to be the acting director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Other members of MAJI are named MJ-2, MJ-3, MJ-4 etc. Members of MAJI are thought to represent an elite group of the brightest minds in science, government, business, military, and intelligence organizations within the United States. Together they formed the Jason Society.MAJI operates in conjunction with the NSA, CIA, FBI, DIA and the NRO (National Recon Organization based in Fort Carson, Colorado). All reports of crashed UFOs and extraterrestrial contacts bypasses normal reporting procedures and are sent directly to MAJI. MAJI has allegedly recovered extra terrestrial craft and bodies. MAJI reportedly coordinated the analysis of an extra terrestrial craft and bodies discovered near Roswell, New Mexico in July 1947. It is alleged that MAJI has made contact with beings known as Greys and is in regular communication with them. MAJI and the Greys reportedly entered into a contract where the government was given advanced extra terrestrial technology. In exchange for this technology the Greys were given land to built bases along with permission to abduct US citizens for research purposes. Last but not least, MJ-12 would be financed by most of the world's illegal drug trade. Following the Conspiracy Theory, MJ-12 would have assassinated President Kennedy when he informed them that he was going to tell the public all the facts of the alien presence. In 1987 various UFO researchers were given a copy of an anonymous document that was an alleged briefing document from ex-US President Truman to President-Elect Eisenhower in November 1953. The document dealt with government knowledge about UFOs, extra terrestrial and the operation of Majestic 12. Critics believe that the document is a complete fraud and there is no evidence to support the existence of such an organization. They noted that the signature, page numbers, and font of the document were not authentic for the time period. While other believe that the document is genuine and represents the first physical evidence of a global conspiracy designed to hide contact with extra terrestrials.In 1995 US Congressman Steve Schiff asked the General Accounting Office (GAO) to investigate the authenticity of the document and the existence of Majestic 12. The GAO letter to Congressman Schiff reported that they could find no government documents referring to a group called Majestic 12 and the Air Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI) declared the document a forgery.The existence of MAJI or Majestic 12 continues to be a mystery. There has never been definitive evidence to prove the existence of MAJI, yet some individuals continue to believe that MAJI has made contact with extra terrestrials and is hiding it from the public.Insiders are members of secret societies, military projects, or government agencies who are privy to non-public information. For various reasons, insiders may leak some of this information to the public. Often they do it anonymously, perhaps through third party contacts on the outside who can vouch for their identity but keep it confidential while relaying the information.They may also speak openly without hiding their identity, but then tend to be careful about not revealing more than they are allowed. Some self-claimed insiders are casually upfront and detailed, seemingly holding nothing back. 1. Dr. Michael Swords, Ph.D Professor of Genetics and Life Sciences, Western Michigan State University. Editor, Journal of UFO Studies (CUFOS). Areas of Special Study: Possibilities of ET visitation based on the Drake Equation; Refutation of Budd Hopkins' Genetic Experimentation Theory Abductions.
Dr. Thomas E. Bullard, Ph.D Degrees in Psychology, Folklore. Special contributor, International UFO Reporter, Journal of UFO Studies. Author, "Abductions: The Measure of a Mystery," a 600-page study of over 300 abduction cases,taking into account such possible explanations as folkloric transmission, hypnotic confabulation, etc. Dr. Bullard started as a skeptic, but remains unconvinced by the skeptical explanations. Also compiled definitive collection and analysis of 1890's airship wave.Recipient, ParaNet's James E. McDonald Key, "For Outstanding Achievement in the Advancement of Scientific Ufology," 1989.Dr. Richard F. Haines, Ph.D Retired NASA Psychologist. Areas of Special Study: Pilot Reports Photo-analysis, Abduction Regression techniques. Author, "The Melbourne Episode" about the disappearance of pilot Frederick Valentich.
Dr. James E. McDonald (deceased) Meteorologist, Professor of Atmospheric Sciences, University of Arizona. Areas of Special Study: Electromagnetic effects cases. Led efforts at Congressional Inquiry, scientific analysis.Richard Hall Science Writer; former Acting Director, NICAP; former Asst.Director, MUFON. Areas of Special Study: Electromagnetic effects cases, Radar trace cases. Author, "Uninvited Guests." Resigned
MUFON over Gulf Breeze case, Lear episode. Currently suffering from Alan Hendry syndrome ("What's the Use?")Donald Schmitt Director, Special Investigations, CUFOS. Areas of Special Study:Refutation of Gulf Breeze evidence; First Roswell Archaeological
Expedition.Ronald Story Science and Technical Writer. Areas of Special Study: Largely
responsible for debunking Ancient Astronaut theory. Author, "UFOs and the Limits of Science" "The UFO Encyclopedia."Barry Greenwood Postal worker. Director, Citizens Against UFO Secrecy. Editor, Just Cause. Areas of Special Study: Procurement and analysis of government documents. Outspoken critic of unscientific UFO proponents. Performed major debunking of MJ-12.John F. Schuessler Engineer, Shuttle Project Director, McDonnell-Douglas Corporation.Asst. Director, MUFON. Areas of Special Study: Cash-Landrum case.Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Ph.D (Deceased)Astronomer, Northwestern University. Scientific Advisor to Project BlueBook. Founder, Scientific Director, CUFOS. Areas of Special Study: All areas. First major advocate of the application of
scientific methodology to UFO study. Created sighting categories such as "Close Encounters." First major skeptic to change sides.Lost some credibility due to indecisive nature, acceptance of some questionable cases as valid.









































