Skylife July 2010

Sochi
A popular city for summer tourism, Sochi, the Antalya of the Black Sea region, is getting ready to host the 2014 Winter Olympics. 
One of the biggest cities on the Russian Federation’s Black Sea coast, Sochi has been our northern neighbor’s most popular tourism destination since the Soviet era. Welcoming around three and a half million tourists every year with a summer population of over a million, Sochi, which is home to over a hundred different ethnic groups, is a typical Caucasian town in terms of its demographic structure.
Nestled in an emerald green environment, Greater Sochi is divided into four main regions, three on the coast and one inland. Lazerevskiy,  the city’s western sector, is named for the Russian explorer and fleet commander, Admiral Lazarev. The middle sector, which also includes the city center, is called Hostinsky. The sector that extends to the Georgia autonomous region of Abkhazia is Adlerskiy, which also boasts the region’s only airport. And the mountainous inland sectors are known as Krasnaya Polyana (Beautiful Meadow).
Passing through Sochi before turning northwards, the coast road runs all the way to Moscow via Krasnodar. The city center is situated in the foothills of two mountains with a view of the Black Sea on either side of the Sochi River, which empties into the sea here. Its center as green as its environs, the city consists almost entirely of big hotels.
From Sanatoriums To Luxury Hotels
Touristic accommodations in the form of a sanatorium began to go up in the 1940’s on the southern shores of Sochi, which is protected from the harsh northern climate by the Caucasus mountains. Used as a hospital during the Second World War, the facilities later served for many years as a vacation spot for factory workers from the inland regions of the country until they were turned over to their managers and workers in 1991.
Dubbed the Riviera of the Black Sea or Russia’s Antalya, Sochi boasts hundreds of touristic facilities of every size along its 145-kilometer coast. The swimming season opens in May and continues through the end of October. The water is a little chilly at the beginning and end of the season, but that’s no problem for those who come from the country’s far colder inland areas. Temperatures approach 30 degrees Celsius in July and August, which means the coasts are always crowded and the hotels almost always full. Arabs head the list of foreigners who are attracted to Sochi. The luxury accommodations built here in this temperature climate and green environment are high priority with affluent Middle Easterners. But Sochi, no longer content with summer tourism alone, is getting ready now to make its name in winter tourism as well.
From The Olympics To Formula One
A coastal town might not seem conducive to the winter olympics. But the Russian President, Vladimir Putin, succeeded in persuading members of the International Olympic Committee during the negotiations for Sochi’s candidacy when he said,  “It can be a lovely spring day on the seashore and winter up in the mountains! Real winter, I can guarantee you that.” And indeed Sochi’s geography, like that of Antalya, is eminently suitable for both summer and winter tourism.
Slated to take place in Sochi February 7-23, 2014, the 22nd Winter Olympics look poised to transform the city’s economic and social life completely. The budget for this big event, which Russia is hosting for the second time following the boycotted 22nd Summer Olympics held in 1980 (during the Soviet era), is gargantuan at 12 billion dollars U.S. This is merely the figure contracted to the International Olympic Committee during the candidacy phase. Several Turkish contracting and sub-contracting firms are among those that are building the sports and accommodations facilities, whose construction is proceeding apace.
At the same time, Sochi is also preparing to make its name heard in conjunction with another major sports event in the years ahead. According to Bernie Ecclestone, boss of the Formula 1 races known around the world as the Grand Prix, Sochi is one of the strongest candidates for replacing some of the European cities that are going to leave the organization next year when their contracts are up.
Putin’s Favorite
But Sochi’s goals are not limited to Formula 1 and the Olympics. Among the city’s near-term plans are to use the giant facilities being built for the Olympics as an international holiday and conference center, as in the Swiss city of Davos. 
The fact is that Russian President Vladimir Putin’s choice of Sochi for a number of international talks during his term both as prime minister and as president ensured recognition of the city on a world scale. Not least thanks to the fact that Putin’s summer house, where he met twice with Turkey’s Prime Minister, Recep Tayyip Erdoðan, in July 2005 and May 2009, is in Sochi.
Neoclassical Architecture, Century-Old Parks
Among places to see in Sochi: The neoclassical style Art Gallery and Winter Theater buildings, the Railroad Station, and the Port building (known as the Sea Station), which is one of the city’s icons with its 74-meter-high tower. Those interested in religious architecture can visit the Cathedral of St. Michael. Dendari Park with its thousands of plant species on a hill overlooking the city is Russia’s largest botanical garden. Riviera Park, with a hundred-year history like Dendari Park, which was laid out in 1982, is another must-see sight in Sochi’s city center.
There is one more place you must not miss when you’ve come as far as Sochi: Mt. Aahun, 11 kilometers from the coast midway along the Adler-Sochi road, affords a splendid panorama of Adler, Sochi and the Caucasus Mountain Range from its 500-meter-high summit. The 1932-built viewing tower here has a number of cafes and gift shops.
Dining Caucasus-Style
You can’t go to the Caucasus without sitting down to a typical Caucasus meal, a feast that traditionally starts with three kinds of beurek. The ‘Tamada’ controls the table. There is no talking without his permission, and no being silent when he has given it. The speeches usually focus on the meaning and importance of that day’s meeting. The tamada gives the floor to the hosts and their guests. During the speech, everyone must stand up, and nothing offered by the speaker is ever turned down.  Several other rituals are followed with exactly the same rigor. In short, if you’re invited to a Caucasus feast you must bow to tradition from the minute you sit down until you rise from the table. It is frowned upon, for example, for young people to sit at the head of the table, and no one can get up to leave without the tamada’s permission.
We learned all these rules from experience at a feast in the garden of the Zapolyarye Sanatorium, one of Sochi’s largest facilities, on a beautiful evening in spring. It was our last evening in Sochi and there was an indescribably beautiful sunset with the ships of the fleet waiting at the exact spot where the sun sank into the Black Sea. Perhaps Putin was in Sochi too… The season had just opened and the town was not yet overrun with tourists. The only thing missing was the proverbial ‘bird’s milk’ (spirits). We were sitting with the Russian, Turkish and Abkhazian guests. In short, everything to do with Sochi was at that table that evening. It was on such an evening that we bade farewell to Sochi, the Russian Federation’s leading touristic center and the one closest to Turkey. A landscape where we felt right at home because it reminded us of our own Black Sea coast, a city just over an hour from Istanbul, where we could make a close acquaintance with Russian and Caucasian cultures.
How To Get There
Turkish Airlines flies to Sochi 
and back three days a week 
on Tuesdays, Thursdays 
and Sundays.
Where To Stay
There are many hotels of international standard in Sochi. And the sanatoriums built to meet the holiday needs of state enterprise personnel in the Soviet era are used today for tourists.
What To Eat
Besides traditional Russian dishes like Borscht, Chicken Kievsky and Shashlik, the 
Black Sea’s tasty fish also 
await you here.

The Story of Jazz in Turkey
Jazz first hit Turkey in the 1920’s, coming not from the U.S. but from Europe, when Leon Avigdor, a musician trained in classical violin, was impressed by the jazz he heard in Paris and took up the alto saxophone as soon as he returned home. Together with a drummer, a banjo-playing business man and a White Russian pianist by the name of Kolya Yaklovlev, he formed Istanbul’s first jazz group, the ‘Ronalds’ quartet.
In 1938, Gido Kornfilt, who had studied conducting in Germany, put together a ten-piece band with drummer Þadan Çaylýgil. A trombone player from the same band, Arto Haçaturyan and his brother Dikran formed a group called the ‘Swing Amateurs’. Making music in the style of Benny Goodman up to 1944, they popularized jazz with the young people of the period. Around the same time, a young filmmaker and clarinetist by the name of Hulki Saner succeeded in putting together the first Turkish ‘big band’.  Known for his interpretations in the style of Artie Shaw, Saner and his Band specialized more in tango and rhumba music.  Another leading clarinetist was Mehmet Akter. But the most interesting of the groups that played at the Kadýköy People’s House was the Necdet Alpün band, which featured three harmonica players as soloists. 
The Breakthrough Years
Jazz in Turkey began to show signs of progress in the 1950’s. Starting in 1949, the programs put together by Erdem Buri, the recordings played by writer, musician and jazz critic Cüneyt Sermet and the jazz history programs he presented during his stint as Director of Western Music at Ankara Radio in the early 1960’s, the broadcasts by Ýsmet Sýral’s band, in which Sermet’s efforts again played a major role, the fledgling efforts of another of Sermet’s jazz converts, Arif Mardin (his compositions and arrangements for the Sermet-Lusigian band and Ýsmet Sýral’s group), pianist Nejat Cendeli’s radio broadcasts with the Sevinç-Sevim Tevs sisters, and Ayten Alpman and Rüçhan Çamay’s broadcasts on Istanbul Radio accompanied by the Ýlhan Gençer group were just some of the projects and activities that brought jazz to the fore in those years.
Harmonica virtuoso Hasan Kocamaz opened Istanbul’s first jazz club, the ‘306’, at Bebek, and the first jazz magazine was brought out by Duygu Saðýroðlu in 1960. A group made up of pianist Atilla Garai, bass player Selçuk Sum and horn player Melih Gürsel, and led by drummer Erol Pekcan, made history with a concert they gave in the basement of the Turkish-American Association in Ankara on February 1, 1958. Another of Turkey’s jazz greats from the 1940’s was multi-instrumentalist Süheyl Denizci, who directed the TRT Light Music and Jazz Orchestra from its founding in 1983 until he retired in 1997.
In that year the baton passed to Berklee graduate Neþet Ruacan.  Around the same time, Muvaffak Falat (known as Maffy in Europe), a trumpet player from Denizci’s generation, earned fame in Sweden. This artist, who had played with Kurt Edelhagen and the Clarke-Boland Big Band in the 1960’s, later formed his own group. He continues to play today in Turkey and in Sweden.
A new generation of jazz musicians, many of them with classical training, began to grow up in Turkey in the 1970’s. While they were gaining experience in the 1980’s as the middle generation, an even younger crop of musicians emerged in their wake in the jazz departments of schools like Berklee and Juilliard and of Turkey’s Bilkent and Bilgi Universities. 
The Jazz Festival
One of the key factors in the popularization of jazz in Turkey was the concerts and informative jazz programs and concert broadcasts by the TRT (Turkish Radio and Television), first on the provincial stations and later on Radio 3. Meanwhile, the concerts and festivals organized since the 1970’s by private organizations and foundations have ensured that world class jazz musicians come to Turkey and meet up with their Turkish counterparts.
Held this year for the 17th time, the ‘International Istanbul Jazz Festival’ is the culmination of a growing interest that began with the first jazz concert (Woody Herman) in the 1974 ‘Istanbul Music Festival’ and continued with an increasing number of jazz concerts every year, eventually evolving into an independent jazz festival. Starting out under the direction of Görgün Taner, the festival continued under Pelin Opçin’s chairmanship in 2005.
Being the recipient of this year’s ‘Lifetime Achievement Award’ was a wonderful surprise for me. I can think of no greater honor than to be remembered alongside the heroes of jazz in Turkey like Ahmet Ertegün, Arif Mardin, Süheyl Denizci, Tuna Ötenel, Ayten Alpman, Rüçhan Çamay, Selçuk Sun, Maffy Falay, Cüneyt Sermet and Ýlhan Kemal Mimaroðlu, all masters I intend to salute when I accept the award at Esma Sultan on opening night, July 1st.
The 17th festival, which, in addition to the jazz masters, addresses an even wider listening audience by including the jazz sub-genres and related styles, intends to offer a similarly consistent program, spreading jazz over the entire metropolis in intriguing concert venues that reflect the city’s special character and doubling listening pleasure in concerts played in venues that complement the jazz experience.
Living Legend
All the events in the festival are worth following, But I have a few recommendations of my own for jazz buffs. First of all, the evening of Thursday, July 15th, is very important. Don’t miss Tony Bennett, who is appearing in Istanbul for the first time in memory of Þakir Eczacýbaþý. This 15-time Grammy winner is a living legend and the chance to hear his powerful vocal instrument in person is worth everything.
A Rain Of Improvisations
Two names spring immediately to mind at the mention of modern Italian jazz: pianist Stefano Bollani and trompet player Enrico Rava, artists I have heard previously in different settings and formats. I’m eager to hear the concert they are going to give in the magical atmosphere of Aya Ýrini on 9 July. There is no doubt that these musicians, who combine Italian sensibility with modern jazz are going to leave our souls awash in a rain of improvisations.

Peaks of the Word
Mountains and their summits are a constant source of life. Imagine a completely flat world! We would have none of the climates, none of the lakes and rushing rivers, none of the biological and cultural diversity we have today
Mountain summits head the list of elements of nature first revered by man for their majestic appearance, and almost all the world’s belief systems involve a holy mountain and the summit that symbolizes it. Among the highest peaks in Turkey are Mt. Aðrý, where Noah landed his ark after the Great Flood, and Mt. Olympus of Greek and Roman mythology. Some summits in the Himalayas today are regarded as sacred and, like Kangchenjunga, the world’s third highest peak, are considered unclimbable out of respect.
ROOF OF THE WORLD
High altitude guides/porters all over the world are known as ‘Sherpa’s since sherpas traditionally accompany all climbers in the Himalayas. Sherpa is actually the name of an ethnic group that inhabits the mountainous region of Nepal, a tribe that abandoned the harsh mountain living conditions of Tibet about 600 years ago to settle here. Their most famous city, Namche Bazaar, at 3,444 meters, is a hub for trekkers and mountaineers from the four corners of the world.
One of the world’s most famous trekking trails, the Everest Base Camp trek is an adventure that leaves an indelible impression on everyone who braves it. The trail’s high elevation and lack of any connection whatsoever with a highway make it different from the others. Everyone who goes to Everest Base Camp passes through this intriguing settlement clinging to the edge of a precipice. Goods coming from the other side of the mountains are carried here on the backs of yaks, sturdy animals unique to the Himalayas. Lodging is available in mountain villages close to 4,000 meters up along the Everest Base Camp trail. Tengboche, location of a famous monastery, is one of them, a settlement at 3,867 meters in northern Nepal’s Khumbu region in the Himalayas.  This is also an extremely good vantage point for viewing other famed Himalayan peaks such as Tawache, Everest, Nuptse, Lhotse, Ama Dablam and Thamserku. Slightly higher than Mt. Aðrý at 5,288 meters, Gorakhshep is the last camp before base camp. It lies below the Everest summit on the Khumbu Ice Fall, one of a handful of glaciers in the world. The spectacular Pumori summit, dubbed Everest’s twin at 7,161 meters, comes into view along the way. With its bright green glacier and glacier lakes, the Khumbu Ice Fall presents a terrifying aspect due to its deep chasms.
ANCIENT CITY AT THE SUMMIT
Machu Picchu in the Peruvian Andes is an example of an ancient city perched on a mountaintop. Its name meaning ‘ancient peak’, Machu Picchu is an ancient Inca settlement founded at an elevation of 2,360 meters in the Urubamba Valley. Its majestic landscape will loom before you in all its splendor at the end of a four-day trek through the Andes.  Immediately next to it another ancient city lies hidden on a summit known as Wayna Picchu (‘young peak’).
But summits don’t always have to be at high elevations. The peaks formed by seaside rock formations like the Gulf of Halong near the Vietnam-China border are as impressive as those at higher altitudes.
AND NOW TURKEY
One hundred and sixty million years ago, during the formation of the Alps and the Himalayas, the terrain of Turkey began to rise and the Anatolian Plateau was formed, bordered by the Taurus and North Anatolian ranges.
Lying between the Alps and the Himalayas, Turkey’s peaks are part of the East-West extension of those ranges and took shape following their formation. Joining in the east, the mountain ranges extend along the north and south of the country, rising from west to east to form its highest peaks such as Mt. Aðrý, Mt. Cilo, Mt. Süphan, Mt. Kaçkar and Mt. Erciyes (ancient Argaeus).
THE LEGEND OF MT. AÐRI
With its Ataturk peak at 5,137 meters, Mt. Aðrý is the highest mountain in Turkey. Higher than all the summits in Europe, it has the added characteristic of rising abruptly on flat terrain as a single mass.
The stuff of legend about which books have been written and films made, Aðrý remains a legend for mountain climbers today with its majestic appearance and year-round ice cap. With a history going back millennia, this glacier is 5 km in diameter with a thickness approaching 300 meters. It covers an area of close to 10 square kilometers and is Turkey’s largest glacier. To be united with his beloved, Ahmet, the protagonist of Yaþar Kemal’s famous novella, ‘The Legend of Mt. Aðrý’, must scale its summit in three days and light a fire there that can be seen from the plain below. Although he successfully climbs the mountain, Ahmet fails reach his beloved.  The summit of Aðrý was believed to be unscalable at the time in which the story is set. The first to climb this mountain, which Marco Polo said would never be scaled, was Prof. Frederik Von Parat on October 9, 1829. Several successful expeditions followed his.  Some three to five thousand people from all over the world have made attempts on this legendary peak to date. 
Another fascinating belief about Mt. Aðrý is that it is the mountain where Noah’s Ark came to rest following the Great Flood. According to the historical sources, the first attempt to find Noah’s Ark was a visit in the 7th century by the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius to the Urartu region where the mountain is located. The English explorer James Bryce, who climbed Aðrý in 1876, claimed to have found here the wooden remains of Noah’s Ark. And James Irwin, the American astronaut who twice set foot on the moon, made two visits to Aðrý in the 1980’s to search for Noah’s Ark.
OTHER SUMMITS
Leaving foreign and Turkish visitors awestruck by their natural beauty, historic texture and unique way of life, the Kaçkar Mountains boast some of the most formidable peaks in the world.
The Aladaðlar, a chain of peaks that spans the provinces of Kayseri, Niðde and Adana, boast a rich diversity in terms of plant cover and animal species.
Be it easy or difficult, completing a climb to the summit gives a mountaineer a supreme sense of accomplishment. Sometimes as easy as pie, sometimes fraught with difficulties, the final steps up to the summit can be cold and steep. But the actual instant of reaching the top is engraved in the memory as a moment filled with emotion and pride that will be remembered over and over for years, the culmination of a struggle with oneself.

Çeþme
With its golden sands, diamond-glinted sea, luxury beach clubs and crazy water sports, Çeþme is the Aegean’s rising star. And this summer it is more determined than ever to shine
Going to Çeþme is one of the most practical ways of escaping the urban stress and oppressive heat, as I quickly realized in the thick shade of a giant palm at the harbor. Little more than an Izmir backwater for years, Çeþme today is a serious contender with Bodrum and Antalya for summer tourism. A boon it perhaps owes to its infinite capacity to reinvent itself. So much has changed since three years ago when I spent one of the best vacations of my life in Çeþme. For one thing, there are the hotels and restaurants, which put the Spanish and Italian coasts to shame. The artsy crowd of urban escapees continue to flock here in droves. Florida photographer Charlie Ibrahim Duygulu for one, who has come here to build yachts at Alaçatý, says Çeþme is even more beautiful than the Greek islands. And there are many other entrepreneurs who have settled here for similar reasons. Long story short, Çeþme’s windy shore just a stone’s throw from Izmir looks like thriving this summer.
THE FLAVOR OF GUM MASTIC
Today’s Çeþme was the ancient Cyssus, a highly developed port city that once controlled the regional trade. In the Ottoman period it performed the key function of controlling the Aegean Sea, and two famous Turkish commanders, Çaka Bey and Cezayirli Hasan Paþa are among the first names that spring to mind at any mention of the town. ‘Çeþme’ means ‘fountain’, and you will of course encounter a host of lovely ones in this area of historic fountains for which streets and squares are named: the Hacý Memiþ Aða, Hafize Rabia Hatun, Kabadayý, Kaymakam Sadýk Bey, Mehmet Kethüda and Mimar Mehmet fountains, to name just a few.  A pleasant stroll starting from the historic city center to the castle and museum is the best way to take in Çeþme’s traditional architecture. The 16th century caravanserai was built to meet the needs of traders coming from distant realms. Çeþme’s houses, the newest of which are a century old, exhibit an unique synthesis of Greek and Turkish architecture. And the legendary terebinth tree with its miraculous cure for all ills continues to grow here. Spearheaded by local nature lovers, a new project aims to turn the tree’s gum mastic to economic gain. Used to flavor everything from jams and coffee to rice pudding, gum mastic makes ice cream, served in a hollowed out Çeþme melon, irresistible. According to the local rag, over a hundred different herbs grow in Çeþme, which is at the same time the Aegean’s purveyor of artichokes. Indeed there is no shortage of products to appeal to the palate here. You can find everything from seafood and vegetarian dishes to world cuisine and diet menus, all at quality service, in Çeþme and its environs.
THE SEVEN WONDERS OF ÇEÞME
With fabulous beaches along its 29-kilometer coastal strip, Çeþme is known for its variety of sands, which rival its cuisines in diversity.  Among them, Ilýca is the most famous of Çeþme’s many touristic areas, including Alaçatý, Ilýca, Çiftlik, Paþalimaný, Þifne and Ildýrý, all of which are in high demand in summer. At two kilometers in length, it is reminiscent of the Maldives with its dazzling white sands and turquoise waters. What’s more, a hot water spring that empties into the sea here transforms Ilýca into one big thermal pool, thanks to which swimming is possible on average six months of the year. To witness this natural wonder, often said to be therapeutic, you must go to Yýldýz Burnu. The beach also boasts courts for beach volleyball buffs. Since the water is only waist-deep even a long way from shore, it’s ideal for families with children. Opened up for tourism in the 1960’s along with Ilýca, the ‘Golden Sands’ Altýnkum beach is entirely covered with natural sand. Meanwhile Dalyan on Çeþme’s northern coast, famous for its yacht harbor, fish restaurants and mermaid statue, is one of the area’s most delightful coves. Its bass, red mullet, and sea and gilthead bream come highly recommended by seasoned Dalyan fisherman Cevat Aksu. Ayayorgi between Dalyan and Ilýca is another natural cove, shaped liked a half moon, where food and drink are served in the sunbathing areas on the wooden landings and grassy lawns. Known in the local parlance as ‘the sleeping sea’, this cove is the choice of those who prefer cooler waters. When it comes to tents and caravans, the lovely beach at Paþalimaný, where the forest meets the sea, is just the spot. A portion of its pebble beach is covered with fine sand. And the water here, where even stones on the sea floor can be seen from meters up, is sparklingly pure as at all the Çeþme beaches.
THE UNDERWATER WORLD
The mysterious underwater world is a key tourist attraction at Çeþme, where life is enhanced by the sea. You can experience memorable moments here, where unequalled diving opportunities await amateurs and professionals alike. The scuba diving points around the islands of Fener, Yatak and Eþek on Ildýrý Bay attract divers with their underwater caves. And don’t be surprised to encounter a Mediterranean seal at any moment! But the real drawing point of the region is the wind surfing at Alaçatý. The cove at Çark Plage, one of the world’s leading wind surfing areas, is a virtual surfing pool.  Sports enthusiasts from around the world can be seen all four seasons here, where the wind blows almost 365 days a year and the sea is very shallow. All of this makes Çeþme a major wind surf area. If you need yet another reason to come to Çeþme, the Çeþme Festival, the Aegean region’s leading art and culture event, is on through July 3rd. Featuring a number of renowned musicians, the international song contest at this year’s 21st festival is scheduled for the last day at Çeþme’s Amphitheatre, with Bonnie Tyler as guest artist. But even if you can’t make the festival at the beginning of July, there will be many more things to please you later on in the summer. And that is why we say, ‘This summer Çeþme!’
HOW TO GET THERE
Turkish Airlines flies from Istanbul to Izmir and back every day of the week. The Izmir-Çeþme road is much shorter and safer now following construction of the new autobahn.
WHERE TO STAY
There is a wide choice of lodging at Çeþme, all the way from modest bed&breakfasts to five-star hotels. Alaçatý’s boutique hotels are especially popular.
WHAT TO BUY
Gum mastic flavored taffy, milk pudding and coffee, pistachio jam, hand-made decorative items, dried flowers, scented soaps and herbals teas are available.

Photogenic Istanbul
You may be a diehard photographer whether you come to Istanbul for pleasure or on business. But time is still money no matter how you look at it.
Ýzzet Kehribar, Merih Akoðul, Arif Aþçý, Ýbrahim Zaman and Timurtaþ Onan are all professional photographers who have been photographing the city for years. We asked them about the tricks of the trade. The sights you can’t leave without recording, the best itinerary for a week-long stay, the hidden corners that nobody knows, the best times for capturing the major landmarks… 
If a Photographer is Skilled and Curious - Ýzzet Kehribar
Those who come to Istanbul for a couple days have little choice but to stick to the classic itinerary: Topkapý Palace, the Blue Mosque, the Hagia Sophia, Yerebatan Cistern… They take one day. That leaves the morning of the second day for the Grand Bazaar, the Spice Bazaar and the Eminönü area and the afternoon for Ortaköy. And in the evening the Galata Tower and the sunset. 
Being here for a week changes everything. You can tour the above sights to your heart’s content and then explore other areas, like Eyüb and its environs, Balat and the Greek School area, Kariye at Edirnekapý, and Çarþamba (and don’t miss the remarkable mosaics in the chapel next to Fethiye Mosque). I especially recommend the little ferryboats that depart from jetties along the Golden Horn and go to Üsküdar (best on a sunny morning). One morning should be set aside for Kuzguncuk and Beylerbeyi, with lunch at one of the restaurants next to Beylerbeyi ferry landing. Take a Bosphorus cruise, keeping in mind that the European side gets the morning sun and the Asian side the afternoon sun. And then a day on the islands. 
In Beyoðlu it’s a good idea to stroll from Tünel up to Taksim, ducking into the side streets along the way, and have a bite either at the Çiçek Pazarý (Flower Market) or on Cezayir Sokak. The best time for taking pictures is at evening when the lights start to come on. There aren’t many places left that nobody knows, but if a photographer is skilled and curious, he can get some fabulous shots in the back streets of Tarlabaþý or of the old houses along the train track at Samatya.
Everyone Seeks His Own Adventure - Arif Aþçý
For a photography buff who’s come to Istanbul for two days, the best shots, apart form the Hagia Sophia and Sultanahmet Square, would be sunset from the Galata Bridge and the Historic Peninsula. The fish sandwich vendors on the Eminönü side of the Galata Brdige and the Karaköy fishmongers at Perþembe Pazarý should definitely be photographed too. At a certain hour of the evening, the fishermen deposit their fish waste in crates right next to the bridge as crying gulls by the thousands hang in the air overhead. Cats keep watch with the gulls over the fishmongers’ tarpaulins. You have to be in the neighborhood of the Galata Bridge at evening to capture these images, which are not available anywhere else in the world.
If you have a week, then you can add Beyazýt Square, the Secondhand Book Bazaar and, next to it, the Grand Bazaar, the slope leading down from Mahmutpaþa to Tahtakale, and Fener, Balat, Eyüp and Ayvansaray on the shores of the Golden Horn. Üsküdar Square, mosque, market and ferry landing are well worth a day, including a meal, and Beþiktaþ, Ortaköy, Arnavutköy, Bebek and Rumelihisar as far as Ýstinye Bay are worth another. A Bosphorus cruise is de rigueur. There is a ferry departing from Eminönü every morning at 10:35. It gets to Anadolu Kavaðý in an hour and a half and starts back after lunch. The route from Karaköy to Kuledibi (below the Galata Tower), the Galip Dede Slope down to Tünel and Ýstiklal Caddesi up to Taksim Square, including a meal at Balýk Pazarý (Fish Market), is worth a day as well. And if you have one more day, Fatih Mosque, Süleymaniye and Zeyrek (including the Kariye Museum) make a fabulous strolling tour. There are some upscale restaurants near Kariye, but my own preference is for Turkish white bean stew (don’t forget the pickles and pilaf) in front of Süleymaniye.
For the human aspect, my recommendations are as follows: the area with the mussels vendors and the boat repairmen at Rumeli Kavaðý, the fishermen’s cafes at Menekþe Station on the Sirkeci-Halkalý suburban train line, the courtyards-cum-workshops near Büyük Valide Han, and the entire area along the city walls from Yedikule to Ayvansaray.
Capturing The Unexpected - Merih Akoðul
Besides straddling two continents, Istanbul also harbors an indescribable mélange. Wherever you go, it’s possible to get incredible shots at unexpected moments. And being in those places in the different seasons and at different times of day means getting unusual photographs as well. 
The first itinerary I’m going to recommend is the route that runs through Yenikapý, Kumkapý, Sultanahmet, Caðaloðlu, Eminönü, the Galata Bridge, Karaköy, Salýpazarý and Beþiktas all the way up to Rumeli Kavaðý. The Golden Horn area through Karaköy, Galata, Beyoðlu and Ýstiklal Caddesi to Taksim is another ideal itinerary for taking photos. And both these routes can be done on foot without using any transportation.
Photographing The Istanbul Skyline - Ýbrahim Zaman
For the skyline, Moda, Harem, Üsküdar, Anadolu Hisarý, the Golden Horn, Pierre Loti, Ulus Park, the Technical University Social Facilities over Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge, Ortaköy, the Khedive Palace, Galata Bridge, Tepebaþý and Eminönü Bridge… Any time from sunrise to 11 a.m. and between 3 and 6 in the afternoon is good for normal shots in these areas; for shots of the skyline, 6 to 8:30 in the evening is preferable. Moda, Harem, Üsküdar, the Khedive’s Palace (views of the European side and the historic peninsula from its courtyard) all give excellent results. Some other places that few people are aware of are the Wednesday market at Yeþilköy, Tuesday market at Kadýköy and Beyazýt flea market.
The Aphrodisiac Route - Timurtaþ Onan
Some simply must-photograph places in Istanbul include the Historic Peninsula, the Golden Horn, and Beyoðlu, or Pera, as it used to be known. The Mýsýr Apartment Building, Tokatlýyan Han, Narmanlý Yurdu, Hazopulo Arcade, St. Antoine Church and the Suriye Pasaj are some important venues chock full of memory. With the historic tram that operates between Taksim and Tünel in the foreground and the urban fabric of Beyoðlu in the background, these are images any tourist would want to take home. At the lower end of Beyoðlu, the area between the Galata Tower, Azapkapý and Tophane with its wonderful architecture (Doðan Apartment Building and the Greek, Georgian and Armenian churches) are worth photographing. And you can go up the Galata Tower in the early morning hours or just before sunset for views of the Istanbul panorama.
The Historic Peninsula and the Golden Horn are a phenomenon in their own right. The boats on the Golden Horn with Galata in the background yield beautiful views at first light. And in the Fener-Balat area with its multicultural diversity of architecture ou can also capture the neighborhood life of the Turkish people who have migrated to the city from Anatolia. Besides the touristic sights on the Historic Peninsula, there are the back streets. Vefa, for example, and the surrounding area. And quarters like Samatya and Kadýrga are a gold mine for those seeking stories. With their seagulls, their people catching fish, their people just gazing spellbound at Istanbul, and their historical backdrop and general layout, the Galata and Unkapaný bridges, at dusk especially, are views no photographer would want to miss.
With its waterfront mansions and pavilions, tea gardens and boats, the Bosphorus offers magnificent landscape shots. My favorite thing is to get chummy with the boatmen at Beylerbeyi and Çengelköy and take their pictures, or to park myself at one of the little ferry landings and shoot the human landscape with the sea and the historical texture as backdrop. Morning’s first light and sundown are ideal here for landscape photographers. And shoots made from the hills of Ortaköy or Beykoz give especially good views with the Bosphorus Bridge.  And of course the Maiden’s Tower should not be forgotten when it comes to sunsets.
As for the aphrodisiac route, that means crossing the Unkapaný bridge and, starting from Zeyrek Mosque and environs, strolling through Cibali, Fener and Balat all the way to Eyüp. Human interest stories, landscapes, documentary shots… All are possible any time of day.

Living, Breathing History: Odunpazarý
The Odunpazarý quarter of Eskiþehir is awaiting you with its historic houses, narrow lanes and warm, friendly people.
The first settlers in Eskiþehir’s Odunpazarý quarter were in a dilemma as to where to found their city. So they hung a sheep’s liver up in two areas in order to decide between them. Whichever place the liver was preserved longer without rotting, that was where they would settle. Odunpazarý was that place!
Whether or not this legend surrounding the founding of the city is true is anybody’s guess, but one thing is sure: Odunpazarý and its unique houses invite you to a cultural and visual feast! Some of the houses that line the narrow streets seem to have stepped right out of an oil painting with their dark brown window frames against pristine white walls. And others add still more colors to the canvas with their indigo blue and tile red facades.
Streets Of Every Color
The houses harbor within them the salient characteristics of Ottoman period urban architecture. Designed both as family spaces and in line with the family’s means of livelihood, they generally consisted of a kitchen, stable, laundry room or storage area on ground level with rooms for the family on the upper levels.  Divans on the cantilevered balconies known as ‘cumba’ (pronounced ‘joombah’) allowed those sitting inside to see out. These cumba’s were usually in the largest room of the house, known as the ‘baþoda’ or ‘head room’,  which was distinguished from the others by its elaborate decorations and wood work. Also encountered in these houses are large cupboards, used for storage in their day but at the same time exemplifying the fine wood workmanship of the period. Many of these houses today have been decorated and enriched with household furnishings that reflect the life of the time.
Besides the houses, the district also boasts the Kurþunlu or Leaded Mosque Complex unique to the period. And the Odunpazarý Glass Museum and historic Atlýhan Market with examples of the region’s traditional handicrafts are among its must-see sights.  
Carried out by the Odunpazarý Municipality, the Odunpazarý Houses Preservation Project is a major undertaking from the point of view of promoting this historic and cultural heritage around the world. Within the scope of the project, the mansions on Beyler Street, which has the highest concentration of traditional Odunpazarý houses, are first being restored in keeping with their original appearance, thus bringing them to the light of day in all their splendor.
Economic Development
But this project is not limited to preserving a cultural heritage. It is also opening the door to serious economic development for the people of the region. More and more tourists are coming here by the day as a result of the restored houses and the promotional activities being carried out, most notably by the Odunpazarý Municipality. The number of entrepreneurs offering bed&breakfasts and other lodging are on the rise and the economy is thriving. Several women entrepreneurs have also joined in the action by opening their own businesses. Having given life to Eskiþehir in the past, Odunpazarý today is continuing to develop with a brand new face and identity. 
If you would like to spend an enjoyable day living and breathing history and witnessing the life of a bygone era, don’t miss Odunpazarý.

Arabia Felix Yemen
Greek geographers of antiquity called it ‘Arabia Felix’ or ‘Happy Yemen’, the land Herodotus had praised in 400 B.C. as ‘the richest country in the world’. Lying on the southwest coast of the Arabian peninsula, Yemen is full of surprises just waiting to be discovered.
Then I landed at Sana’a Airport after a pleasant five-and-a-half-hour flight from Istanbul to the Yemen capital, I was once again confronted by the fact that if you want to know a place you have to go there. My first reminder was Sana’a’s cool evening air. I had thought the heat was going to give me trouble on my trip, which coincided with the first days of summer, but it wasn’t that way. Apart from the coastal strip on the west and south, the altitude is around 2,400 meters in Yemen, which is home to some of the highest peaks on the Arabian peninsula.  In other words, the elevation ensures comfortable weather for a trip at the height of summer. In areas like Aden, Hudaydah and Mukalla on the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, in contrast, a hot climate reigns in every season. Yemen is a land where you can experience different seasons and climates all at once.
Impressive History And Architecture
The country’s quintessential towns, Sana’a, Aden, Mayeen and Ma’rib, have been inhabited without interruption for 2,500 years. Its name frequently mentioned in the holy books of the monotheistic religions, Yemen was the capital of the Sabaean and Himyarite kingdoms in antiquity. Its cities are known for their legendary gardens of Shaddad bin Ad, built in emulation of the garden of paradise, and their unique architecture, which has survived to our day. Besides monuments of the early Islamic period, vestiges of the Ottoman Empire, which arrived in the region in the 16th century, are visible all over Yemen. Buildings reflecting 19th century British influence stand out in Aden. And the 12 and 13-story houses in the town of Shibam, which are regarded as the world’s first skyscrapers, have been declared a UNESCO World Cultural Heritage.
Sana’a, City Of Dreams
The capital Sana’a is the first must-see place in Yemen. The Ali Abdullah es-Salih Mosque on the way into the city is its pride and joy. This magnificent temple, construction of which got underway in 2001 and was completed in 2008, exhibits traces of the world’s masterpieces of Islamic architecture. References to the mosques of Istanbul, Cairo, Baghdad, Andalusia and Isfahan render this splendid monument even more significant. Leaving the universities, and the business and government districts behind, we delve now into Bab al-Yemen to meet the real Sana’a. 
Bab Al-Yemen
The main gateway to Old Sana’a is called ‘Bab al-Yemen’, which means ‘Yemen Gate’ in Turkish. Like a castle entrance, it opens onto a square teeming with itinerant vendors. In me the gate awakened a sense of stepping into a time capsule. Peddlers in local costume, exotic eastern spices, textiles, fabrics and incense envelop you immediately. Hundreds of labyrinthine streets open onto a dizzying variety of markets and bazaars. But don’t panic. It is almost impossible to get lost here because the Yemeni people are eminently helpful. Quickly realizing that you have lost your way, they will escort you right back to Bab al-Yemen’s main entrance. You can stroll about safely night and day, mingling with the locals, in this city where the crime rate is extremely low. The bazaar merchants will invite you for coffee, even offer you food, and they mean it too. You don’t have to buy anything either. All you have to do is smile! It’s a good idea to do a little bargaining when you shop in Bab al-Yemen. But the merchants here definitely don’t try to gouge the tourists. There is no difference between the price quoted to you and the price quoted to a native. The Turkish TV series recently broadcast on Arab television have made an impact here as well. People start reeling off the names of the characters the minute they realize you’re a Turk! Bab al-Yemen is also the place in Sana’a where you can see traditional Yemen architecture, and the area has been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site accordingly. Among the monuments from the Ottoman period, Bekriye Mosque is also located here. And the Great Mosque with its towering minaret is just another of the sights you can visit here.
Aden
A tropical climate reigns at Aden on the shores of the Indian Ocean. The air here is extremely humid, which is why the streets are deserted at midday and only begin to liven up again at dusk. Aden’s harbor has ensured that the city is a center of trade, and the number of people of Indian and African origin is quite high here. Fisheries are also highly developed since Aden is a coastal town, and the city’s fish market brims over daily with a widely varied catch. The cuisine here is highly spiced, as it is throughout Yemen. Meanwhile, in the city’s architecture it is possible to see buildings bearing traces of the period of British rule. Aden’s beaches are convenient for those who want to swim in the Indian Ocean’s clear, warm waters. The historic dams and weirs built in Aden in antiquity and repaired by the British are still in use. Along with them, the desert where legendary lovers Leila and Majnun were separated from each other is another sight worth seeing just outside Aden on the road to Taiz.
Taiz
Like almost every settlement in Yemen, Taiz is a town that dates far back in history. Yemen’s cultural capital, Taiz lies in the foothills of Mount Sabir at some 
3 thousand meters in altitude. Harboring monuments from the Ottoman, Mamluk and Ayyubid periods, Taiz is also Yemen’s industrial and manufacturing hub.
One Land, Many Aspects
That is how Yemenis sum up their country. And this phrase really says it all about a land like Yemen which has desert, mountains and the sea and is suitable for both diving and cultural tourism.  Everything you see in Yemen is real. Nothing has been created for touristic purposes, nothing is artificial. Yemen is awaiting you now with its rooted past and its natural and cultural riches.

Confidentail Secratary of Sultan 
Like personal assistants to the sultans, they kept records of everything, from daily routines to affairs of state.
One of the Eunuchs of the Privy Chamber, conspicuous for their opulent costumes and attractive physiques, who accompanied the sultan on mounted excursions and to the Friday Prayers where he met with the common people and displayed his wealth, his multitude of soldiers and retainers, and his power and glory, the Confidential Secretary was distinguished from the others by the golden pencase he carried in a sash around his waist.
Everyday Life In The Palace
He was at the Sultan’s side every minute, in the Palace, even on mounted expeditions inside and outside the City Walls, taking notes as best he could on the paper of every size he carried on his person, writing down all the important developments in domestic and foreign politics, the ceremonies, the fires and earthquakes, the births of princes, the appointments to key offices, the deaths, in short, everything that transpired in the summer and winter palaces. 
Sporting a Selimi-style pleated turban, an imperial fur, and a three-layered robe made of floral-patterned Bursa silk over red shalvar and yellow slippers, he made a rather modest appearance. But the important diaries he kept held up a mirror to everyday life in the Ottoman palace.
Creation Of The Office
Besides the Prophet Muhammed and his divinely inspired scribes who wrote down the Quran, rulers and military commanders also employed scribes for the correspondence they kept. The first four caliphs, the so-called ‘rightly guided caliphs’, are also known to have employed private secretaries. The first institution in charge of official correspondence was the Council of Letters, set up under the Umayyads. With direct ties to the caliphate, this institution continued in the Abbasid period as well, and the Abbasid caliph Al-Mahdi Billah (775-785) had his letters written by ‘confidential secretaries’. The Fatimids in turned renamed the office the Council of Letter Writing. The Ayyubids kept the name officially confering the title of ‘confidential secretary’ upon its head. In the Mamluk period the office functioned as one of the most important in the civil bureaucracy. Elevated in rank under the dynasty of the Burji Mamluks, confidential secretaries ranked ahead of viziers in court protocol. In time the confidential secretary came to handle the affairs of judges, scholars and other members of the Ulema as well, and the Sultan even sought his opinion when making appointments to this class. 
In The Ottoman Period
In the Ottoman period, the office of confidential secretary had its inception with Þemseddin Kasým during the reign of Sultan Bayezid II (1481-1512). With the expansion of the bureaucracy under Sultan Mahmud II, its nature changed slightly until it was transformed into the office of Chief Clerk of the Imperial Court.
Secret meetings that don’t appear in the history books, outings the sultan made in disguise, ceremonies, and ordinary and extraordinary consultations with the grand vizier were written up in the diaries of the confidential secretaries. While these accounts recorded information concerning the sultan’s special tastes, his habits of worship, the music he listened to and the sports he followed, they also provided clues to his personality between the lines.
Qualities Sought In A Confidential Secretary
Chosen from among the most skilled and trusted clerks, confidential secretaries were knowledgeable in matters of theology, acquainted with the study of history and trained in literature. Despite these traits, their proximity to the sultan and the privileged position accorded them as the writers of his correspondence made other members of the bureaucracy beholden to them as intermediaries. Archival documents from the period of Sultan Selim II present a striking picture of the position these secretaries enjoyed.
To wit, a member of the bureaucracy who wanted to gift the sultan some of the imitation English and Flemish fabrics that were being made in Anatolia wanted to send some of the same fabrics to the confidential secretary as well! And the Sheikhulislam, in a letter he wrote to an individual in the imperial service, complains that the Confidential Secretary Ahmed Bey has insulted the office of Sheikhulislam by sending men around upon the rejection of his brother-in-law Ahmed Molla’s illegitimate request for a promotion.
Duties Of A Confidential Secretary
The Confidential Secretary was one of 40 eunuchs selected for employment in the Privy Chamber. Carrying writing paper and other writing materials in a silver-embroidered bag he wore round his neck and a pot of gold ink in a sash at his waist was one of the obligations of his office. It was he who handled the sultan’s correspondence and sent the imperial rescripts written by the sultan up to the Sublime Porte with whoever was responsible for transmitting reports that day, the Harem Eunuch, the Chief Butler or the Head of the Halberdiers.  Making clean copies of the petitions presented to the sultan at the Friday prayers or on outings on horseback, he would read them to the sovereign, write up the requisite replies and submit them to the appropriate places. Together with the Librarian, he was responsible for preserving the books in the Privy Chamber. In the sultan’s private library, which was located in the second section of the Hall with a Pool, another name for the third room of the Privy Chamber, he would read aloud to the sultan at his behest from books he chose out of his valuable collection. Perhaps there were even those who, while reading the history books among these priceless, illuminated volumes, fantasized that their own notes would one day take the form of a book and be read to sultans down the centuries…
The notes taken by confidential secretaries contain important information on the history of Istanbul as well. The palaces, military and commercial buildings, markets and excursion grounds no longer known today, whose names and locations are noted only in these diaries, are a gold mine of information about the panorama that was Istanbul life.
When presenting clear and detailed information about the official life of the sultans, confidential secretaries do not betray any details of their private lives. Some of them give the sultan’s daily schedule down to the hour, while others divide up the day into the five times of prayer.
Confidential secretaries also provide no information about themselves in the detailed diaries they presented to the sultans. Only scraps of emotion that seep between the lines enable us to glean what they thought and felt about the events going on around them.
Writing The History 
The notes taken by confidential secretaries contain important information on the history of Istanbul as well. The palaces, military and commercial buildings, markets and excursion grounds no longer known today, whose names and locations are noted only in these diaries, are a gold mine of information about the panorama that was Istanbul life.
When presenting clear and detailed information about the official life of the sultans, confidential secretaries do not betray any details of their private lives. Some of them give the sultan’s daily schedule down to the hour, while others divide up the day into the five times of prayer.
Confidential secretaries also provide no information about themselves in the detailed diaries they presented to the sultans. Only scraps of emotion that seep between the lines enable us to glean what they thought and felt about the events going on around them.

Blue Cruise in Magic Waters
A blue cruise on Turkey's southern Aegean and western Mediterranean turquoise coasts for those seeking an enchanting summer holiday.
Poet Bedri Rahmi Eyüboðlu went on a blue cruise in the 1950’s with his literary colleagues, writing afterwards in his account: “The blue cruise is a fairy tale, untold, unwritten, unillustrated…” In Turkey today the blue cruise is made in a region that includes the country’s southern Aegean and western Mediterranean shores. Horizons awash in myriad tones of blue, hot, golden-sand beaches, water lapping the side of the boat, the pungent iodine scent of the sea… If all this makes your head spin, then you are ready to set out on a blue cruise.
THE PORTS OF ANATOLIA
Before you embark on a blue cruise, there is one crucial thing you need to decide: On which day and from which port are you going to lift anchor, and in which harbor are you going to end your cruise. Port choices include Bodrum, Marmaris, Göcek, Antalya, Fethiye, Kaþ, Datça and Kuþadasý. Cruises range from day outings to three-day, even week-long voyages. If you like you can start from Kuþadasý and sail as far as Antalya. But experienced captains recommend that you shun cruises of more than a week in favor of intriguing bays and routes with lots of surprises. If you already have a congenial group, or if you prefer to be alone on your cruise, you can rent a boat and take off in whatever direction you like. If you’re thinking of renting a more modest vessel rather than a gulet, you can opt for one of the European-made fiberglass craft, called a ‘bareboat’. And if you have an amateur sailing license, then you can use one of these boats, which can operate either sail- or engine-powered, without any crew. Otherwise, you can join one of the package tours organized by travel agencies and rent a cabin in one of the many different boats of all sizes that are available. Known as ‘cabin charters’, these package tours offer attractive terms of payment. Besides the beauty of nature, a blue cruise also promises a hefty dose of history, all the way from the Ottoman, Byzantine and Roman to the ancient Anatolian civilizations of Lycia, Pamphilia and Caria. The best time for spring and summer cruises is from early June to late September.
PASSING THE TIME ON BOARD
Energized by the spellbinding landscapes and the oxygen-rich air, you will start your day early on a blue cruise. The hours before the midday heat and close to sunset are best for being on the water and those when the sun is scorching hot perfect for anchoring in a cove and doing a lot of swimming and napping, exploring the environs on foot, going shopping and enjoying lunch at a rustic fish restaurant. If you have no sailing license, you will need to have a captain on your boat. If you set sail on a hot summer day, it’s a good idea to have some air conditioning as well. Sleeping on deck on windless, starry nights is an added boon. With its spacious, modern interiors, the gulet, traditional boat of Turkey’s southwestern coastline, ensures passengers a comfortable holiday.  Running 14 to 20 meters in length, these wooden craft are suitable for extended cruises thanks to their cabins, corridors and decks. Equipped with heating and air conditioning options and king-size beds, their cabins, which are designed for a view of the sea, also include a toilet, wash basin, shower, stove and oven, radio and refrigerator. Have no worries either if you happen to be particularly fastidious when it comes to sheets and towels, because both are changed frequently. Cabins do not usually include television, but if you can’t live without it, just say so when making your reservation. An experienced captain and a couple service personnel will accompany for your entire voyage. And plastic boats are conveniently ready and waiting at all times to ferry you to shore.
THE MOST POPULAR ROUTES
One of the most crucial details for an unforgettable blue cruise is choosing the right route to satisfy your expectations. Bodrum, Marmaris and Kaþ are the favored ports for blue cruises on Turkey’s coasts. Cruises from Bodrum take one of two main routes: the northern route from Bodrum to the Bay of Güllük and its  breezy coves is ideal for water sports like surfing. Güllük cruises from Bodrum stop at the peninsula’s most beautiful bays such as Gümüþlük, Altýnkum, Akbük, Torba, Göltürkbükü and Yalýkavak. If you like, you can also visit the ancient cities of Didyma, Miletus and Priene. For those who prefer to set sail from Marmaris, three different routes await you: the Bozburun and Datça peninsulas and the Bay of Fethiye. The cruise to Datça includes Datça and Knidos as well as the bays and small islands between Hisarönü, Kýzkumu, Orhaniye, Selimiye and Bozukkale. The Fethiye route includes a day at Dalyan and a tour of the ancient city of Kaunos. The other days are spent exploring the historical sites and natural riches of Fethiye Bay. One of the most beautiful blue cruises of all is the Kaþ-Demre route, one of the loveliest routes in the whole wide world, where you can see the island of Kekova, the Sunken City, Kaleköy (Simena), Santa Claus’s house and the ancient city of Myra. And as long as you’ve come as far as Demre, don’t forget to taste the blue crabs that are indigenous to this area. Whichever route you choose, you will experience the beauty of Turkey on the sea. And the endless blue in all its myriad shades.
