MONKEYS
A monkey is a primate, either an Old World monkey or a New World monkey. There are about 260 known living species of monkey. Many are arboreal, although there are species that live primarily on the ground, such as baboons. Monkeys are generally considered to be intelligent. Unlike apes, monkeys usually have tails. Tailless monkeys may be called "apes", incorrectly according to modern usage; thus the tailless Barbary macaque is called the "Barbary ape".The New World monkeys are classified within the parvorder Platyrrhini, whereas the Old World monkeys (superfamily Cercopithecoidea) form part of the parvorder Catarrhini, which also includes the hominoids (apes and humans). Thus, scientifically speaking, monkeys are a paraphyletic group, meaning that although they are believed to have evolved from a single ancestral species, the group does not contain all the descendants of that ancestor. Old World monkeys are more closely related to homonids than they are to New World monkeys.According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word "monkey" may originate in a German version of the Reynard the Fox fable, published circa 1580. In this version of the fable, a character named Moneke is the son of Martin the Ape.[1] In English, no very clear distinction was originally made between "ape" and "monkey"; thus the 1910 Encyclopaedia Britannica entry for "ape" notes that it is either a synonym for "monkey" or is used to mean a tailless humanlike primate.[2] Such confusions persist. Colloquially, the terms "monkeys" and "apes" may still be used interchangeably.[3] Due to its size (up to 1 m/3 ft) the Mandrill is often thought to be an ape, but it is actually an Old World monkey. Also, a few monkey species deceptively have the word "ape" in their common name, such as the Barbary Ape.Later in the first half of the 20th century, the idea developed that there were trends in primate evolution and that the living members of the order could be arranged in a series, leading through "monkeys" and "apes" to humans.[4] Monkeys thus constituted a "grade" on the path to humans and were distinguished from "apes".Scientific classifications are now more often based on monophyletic groups, that is groups consisting of all the descendants of a common ancestor. The New World monkeys and the Old World monkeys are each monophyletic groups, but their combination is not, since it excludes hominoids (apes and humans). Thus the term "monkey" no longer refers to a recognized scientific taxon. The smallest accepted taxon which contains all the monkeys is the infraorder Simiiformes, or simians. However this also contains the hominoids (apes and humans), so that monkeys are, in terms of currently recognized taxa, non-hominoid simians.
A group of monkeys may be referred to as a mission or a tribe.Monkeys range in size from the Pygmy Marmoset, at 140 to 160 millimetres (5–6 in) long (plus tail) and 120 to 140 grams (4–5 oz) in weight, to the male Mandrill, almost 1 metre (3.3 ft) long and weighing 35 kilograms (77 lb). Some are arboreal (living in trees) while others live on the savanna; diets differ among the various species but may contain any of the following: fruit, leaves, seeds, nuts, flowers, eggs and small animals (including insects and spiders).Some characteristics are shared among the groups; most New World monkeys have prehensile tails while Old World monkeys have non-prehensile tails or no visible tail at all. Some have trichromatic color vision like that of humans, others are dichromats or monochromats. Although both the New and Old World monkeys, like the apes, have forward-facing eyes, the faces of Old World and New World monkeys look very different, though again, each group shares some features such as the types of noses, cheeks and rumps.The many species of monkey have varied relationships with humans. Some are kept as pets, others used as model organisms in laboratories or in space missions. They may be killed in monkey drives when they threatened agriculture, or used as service animals for the disabled.In some areas, some species of monkey are considered agricultural pests, and can cause extensive damage to commercial and subsistence crops.[6] This can have important implications for the conservation of endangered species, which may be subject to persecution. In some instances farmers' perceptions of the damage may exceed the actual damage.[7] Monkeys that have become habituated to human presence in tourist locations may also be considered pests, attacking tourists.In religion and culture, the monkey often represents quick-wittedness and mischief.Some organizations, for example Helping Hands: Monkey Helpers for the Disabled[9], train capuchin monkeys as monkey helpers to assist quadriplegics and other people with severe spinal cord injuries or mobility impairments. After being socialized in a human home as infants, the monkeys undergo extensive training before being placed with a quadriplegic. Around the house, the monkeys help out by doing tasks including microwaving food, washing the quadriplegic's face and opening drink bottles.Macaques, especially the Rhesus Macaque, and African Green Monkeys are widely used in animal testing facilities, either wild-caught or purpose-bred.[11] They are used primarily because of their relative ease of handling, their fast reproductive cycle (compared to apes) and their psychological and physical similarity to humans. In the United States, around 50,000 non-human primates, most of them monkeys, have been used in experiments every year since 1973; 10,000 monkeys were used in the European Union in 2004.Sam, a rhesus macaque, was flown to a height of 55 miles (89 km) by NASA in 1959.The use of monkeys in laboratories is controversial. Animal rights activists claim that their use is cruel and produces little information of value, and there have been many protests, vandalism to testing facilities and threats to workers.[citation needed] Others claim that it has led to many important medical breakthroughs such as the rabies vaccine, understanding of human reproduction and basic knowledge about brain function and that the prevention of harm to humans should be a higher priority than the possible harm done to monkeys. The topic has become a popular cause for animal rights and animal welfare groups.A number of countries have used monkeys as part of their space exploration programmes, including the United States and France. The first monkey in space was Albert II who flew in the US-launched V-2 rocket on June 14, 1949.As foodMonkey brains are eaten as a delicacy in South East Asia, China, and Africa.[12] In traditional Islamic dietary laws, the eating of monkeys is forbidden. However, monkeys are sometimes eaten in parts of Africa, where they can be sold as "bushmeat".LiteratureSun Wukong (the "Monkey King"), a character who figures prominently in Chinese mythology, is the main protagonist in the classic comic Chinese novel Journey to the West.Monkeys are prevalent in numerous books, television programs, and movies. The television series Monkey and the literary characters Monsieur Eek and Curious George are all examples.Simian statue at a Buddhist shrine in Tokyo, Japan.Informally, the term "monkey" is often used more broadly than in scientific use, and may be used to refer to apes, particularly chimpanzees, gibbons, and gorillas. Author Terry Pratchett alludes to this difference in usage in his Discworld novels, in which the Librarian of the Unseen University is an orangutan who gets very violent if referred to as a monkey.Hanuman, a prominent divine entity in Hinduism, is a monkey-like humanoid. He may bestow longevity.In Buddhism, the monkey is an early incarnation of Buddha but may also represent trickery and ugliness. The Chinese Buddhist "mind monkey" metaphor refers to the unsettled, restless state of human mind. Monkey is also one of the Three Senseless Creatures, symbolizing greed, with the tiger representing anger and the deer lovesickness.The Mizaru or three wise monkeys are revered in Japanese folklore.The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature.[15] They placed emphasis on animals and often depicted monkeys in their art.The Signifying Monkey is a character of African-American folklore that derives from the trickster figure of Yoruba mythology, Esu Elegbara. This character was transported with Africans to the Americas under the names of Exu, Echu-Elegua, Papa Legba, and Papa Le Bas. Esu and his variants all serve as messengers who mediated between the gods and men by means of tricks.[1] The Signifying Monkey is “distinctly Afro-American” and is thought to derive from Cuban mythology, which depicts Echu-Elegua with a monkey at his side.Numerous songs and narratives concern the Signifying Monkey and his interactions with his friends, the Lion and the Elephant.[3] In general the stories depict the Signifying Monkey insulting the Lion, but claiming that he is only repeating the Elephant’s words. The Lion then confronts the Elephant, who soundly beats the Lion. The Lion later comes to realize that the Monkey has been signifyin(g) and has duped him and returns angrily.The Cebidae is one of the five families of New World monkeys now recognised. It includes the capuchin monkeys and squirrel monkeys.[2] These species are found throughout tropical and subtropical South and Central America.Cebid monkeys are arboreal animals that only rarely travel on the ground. They are generally small monkeys, ranging in size up to that of the Brown Capuchin, with a body length of 33 to 56 cm, and a weight of 2.5 to 3.9 kilograms. They are somewhat variable in form and coloration, but all have the wide, flat, noses typical of New World Monkeys.They are omnivorous, mostly eating fruit and insects, although the proportions of these foods vary greatly between species. They have the dental formula:
Females give birth to one or two young after a gestation period of between 130 and 170 days, depending on species. They are social animals, living in groups of between five and forty individuals, with the smaller species typically forming larger groups. They are generally diurnal in habit.Previously, New World monkeys were divided between Callitrichidae and this family. For a few recent years, marmosets, tamarins, and lion tamarins were placed as a subfamily (Callitrichinae) in Cebidae, while moving other genera from Cebidae into the families Aotidae, Pitheciidae and Atelidae.[1] The most recent classification of New World monkeys again splits the callitrichids off, leaving only the capuchins and squirrel monkeys in this family.The critically endangered golden lion tamarin is named for its striking orange mane. Golden lions live primarily in the trees. They sleep in hollows at night and forage by day while traveling from branch to branch. Long fingers help them stay aloft and snare insects, fruit, lizards, and birds.Japanese macaques, also called snow monkeys, live farther north than any other non-human primates. Their thick coats help them survive the frigid temperatures of central Japan's highlands. But when the mercury really plummets, they go to plan B: hot-tubbing in the region's many thermal springs.Howlers are New World monkeys found in tropical Central and South America. They are aptly named for their cacophonous cries. When a number of howlers let loose their lungs in concert, often at dawn or dusk, the din can be heard up to three miles (five kilometers) away. Male monkeys have large throats and specialized, shell-like vocal chambers that help to turn up the volume on their distinctive call. The noise sends a clear message to other monkeys: This territory is already occupied by a troop.These vocal primates are the biggest of all the New World monkeys. Unlike Old World monkeys, howlers and other New World species have wide, side-opening nostrils and no pads on their rumps. Howlers also boast a prehensile tail. They can use this tail as an extra arm to grip or even hang from branches—no Old World monkeys have such a tail. A gripping tail is particularly helpful to howler monkeys because they rarely descend to the ground. They prefer to stay aloft, munching on the leaves that make up most of their diet.Howler monkeys have beards and long, thick hair which may be black, brown, or red. The red howler species is the most common, but it is often targeted by hunters eager for bushmeat. Other species of howler monkey may be critically endangered over sections of their ranges.whoop… whoop… whoop!” The branches shake and dark objects scatter across the treetops. If you are standing in the tropical forest you probably just heard monkeys over your head. Agile and acrobatic monkeys easily leap through the forest but are often difficult to see and study. Most monkeys live in tropical regions in the Americas, Africa, and Asia and spend much of their lives in treetops. Monkeys belong to a larger group of mammals called primates. Primates have large brains, grasping hands and include lemurs, apes and humans. Like other primates, monkeys are very intelligent and curious and like you, have forward-facing eyes for great depth perception.Monkeys are divided into two main groups: Old World monkeys and New World monkeys. These groups have been evolving independently from one another for millions of years.Old World monkeys, such as mandrills and baboons, are native to Africa and Asia. Old World monkeys live in a variety of different habitats, from grasslands to rainforests to snowy mountain peaks. They can live in the trees or on the ground. In general, Old World monkeys have:curved nostrils that are close together cheek pouches for storing food sitting pads on their rears tails that cannot grasp limbs and trees.Old World monkeys, such as mandrills and baboons, are native to Africa and Asia. Old World monkeys live in a variety of different habitats, from grasslands to rainforests to snowy mountain peaks. They can live in the trees or on the ground. In general, Old World monkeys have: curved nostrils that are close together cheek pouches for storing food sitting pads on their rears tails that cannot grasp limbs and trees.Black handed spider monkeys eat a lot of food over a short period of time and they like to eat while hanging, climbing or moving.  Using their prehensile tails to swing through the forest, spider monkeys can move very fast.Baboons and mandrills weigh in as some of the largest in the monkey world. Both of these Old World monkeys live in Africa. The males weigh up to 30-36 kg. Their primary predators are human beings, who hunt them for food. Mandrills are endangered because of this hunting.
The smallest monkey species is the pygmy marmoset, which is a New World monkey. Adults weigh 113 to 119 g. Pygmy marmosets are found in the tropical rainforest in the upper Amazon basin in South America. They live mostly in trees and are active during the day. They are not currently endangered. However, scientists are concerned about their population because pygmy marmosets are increasingly being sold as pets.The face and rear of the male mandrill can become brighter in color when excited. It becomes more colorful as they get older.  Their blue, red and purple face and rear can help to identify one another when searching for foods.Pregnancy and birth in monkeys varies by species. The pygmy marmoset lives in a group of six. Only the dominant female in the group has babies. Offspring are often fraternal twins--the kind of twins that don’t look exactly alike. After birth, the offspring are carried around by the males in the community. They are returned to the mother for nursing. Squirrel monkeys are also New World monkeys, but they have different birth habits. After birth, the newborn clings to its mother’s back rather than being carried by males. Other female squirrel monkeys, rather than males, share newborn care with the mother.During the first month of life, baby olive baboons nurse and sleep frequently with their mother.  As they get older, olive baboons play by themselves or with their peers and they will become more active.The lifespan of monkeys depends on the species. In the wild, squirrel monkeys can live up to 20 years. Squirrel monkeys spend their lives in trees and are vulnerable as prey for eagles. Howler monkeys live 15 to 20 years in the wild. Howler monkeys have been hunted and their habitats have been destroyed. This greatly decreases the lifespan of the species. Mandrills live up to 45 years in the wild. They are also hunted for food.Monkeys have bodies that are similar in a lot of ways to our own, with arms, legs, and thumbs that can move easily. They also have flexible arms and legs for grasping and climbing. But you might be surprised that they can not swing through the branches. Only apes and humans can swing from trees, monkey’s shoulders are not designed to allow for swinging.Old World and New World monkeys look considerably different, as you can see below. Baboons are Old World monkeys and capuchins are New World monkeys.Monkeys are divided into two main groups: Old World monkeys and New World monkeys. These groups have been evolving independently from one another for millions of years.Baby pigtail macaques may be taken by other adult females in the group. All females in the group show great interest in infants, and higher-ranking females often grab lower-ranking females’ infantsOld World monkeys
Old World monkeys, such as mandrills and baboons, are native to Africa and Asia. Old World monkeys live in a variety of different habitats, from grasslands to rainforests to snowy mountain peaks. They can live in the trees or on the ground. In general, Old World monkeys have: curved nostrils that are close togethecheek pouches for storing food sitting pads on their rearsails that cannot grasp limbs and trees Black handed spider monkeys eat a lot of food over a short period of time and they like to eat while hanging, climbing or moving.  Using their prehensile tails to swing through the forest, spider monkeys can move very fast.The face and rear of the male mandrill can become brighter in color when excited. It becomes more colorful as they get older.  Their blue, red and purple face and rear can help to identify one another when searching for food. Baboons and mandrills weigh in as some of the largest in the monkey world. Both of these Old World monkeys live in Africa. The males weigh up to 30-36 kg. Their primary predators are human beings, who hunt them for food. Mandrills are endangered because of this hunting.The smallest monkey species is the pygmy marmoset, which is a New World monkey. Adults weigh 113 to 119 g. Pygmy marmosets are found in the tropical rainforest in the upper Amazon basin in South America. They live mostly in trees and are active during the day. They are not currently endangered. However, scientists are concerned about their population because pygmy marmosets are increasingly being sold as pets. During the first month of life, baby olive baboons nurse and sleep frequently with their mother.  As they get older, olive baboons play by themselves or with their peers and they will become more active.Pregnancy and birth in monkeys varies by species. The pygmy marmoset lives in a group of six. Only the dominant female in the group has babies. Offspring are often fraternal twins--the kind of twins that don’t look exactly alike. After birth, the offspring are carried around by the males in the community. They are returned to the mother for nursing. 
Squirrel monkeys are also New World monkeys, but they have different birth habits. After birth, the newborn clings to its mother’s back rather than being carried by males. Other female squirrel monkeys, rather than males, share newborn care with the mother. LifespansThe lifespan of monkeys depends on the species. In the wild, squirrel monkeys can live up to 20 years. Squirrel monkeys spend their lives in trees and are vulnerable as prey for eagles. Howler monkeys live 15 to 20 years in the wild. Howler monkeys have been hunted and their habitats have been destroyed. This greatly decreases the lifespan of the species. Mandrills live up to 45 years in the wild. They are also hunted for food. Monkey Anatomy Monkeys have bodies that are similar in a lot of ways to our own, with arms, legs, and thumbs that can move easily. They also have flexible arms and legs for grasping and climbing. But you might be surprised that they can not swing through the branches. Only apes and humans can swing from trees, monkey’s shoulders are not designed to allow for swinging. Old World and New World monkeys look considerably different, as you can see below. Baboons are Old World monkeys and capuchins are New World monkeys.An olive baboon troop, or group, forages for food. Troops of olive baboons are mostly made up of females and their young, but include a few males.Many species of monkeys live in groups called troops. Troops allow monkeys to protect themselves from predators, such as humans. In Africa, mandrills can live in troops of up to 45 monkeys. Mandrill troops are led by a dominant male, which has the brightest colors on his face--and also on his rear! The troop also includes several breeding females and their offspring. Western red colobus monkeys live in troops of up to 80 monkeys. The large size of their troops helps protect them from the humans and chimpanzees that hunt them for food. Vocal and visual communication is important to olive baboons.  In the most stressful situations “screams” can be sounded, as a high-pitched and continuous vocalization.  These can be a response to intense emotions of pain, fear, or aggression.Monkeys communicate with hand gestures, facial expressions, and noises called vocalizations. Vocalizations can be quite complex and are often used to warn other monkeys of predators. Mother monkeys can distinguish the vocalizations of their own infants from other babies. There is also evidence that suggests that some monkey species have developed rules for putting together phrasesStaring is thought to be a threat in monkey communities. Staring is often followed by looking away if confrontation is to be avoided. Showing of teeth is often also interpreted as a threat. Here Comes the Groom Monkeys form relationships with other monkeys in their species in different ways. They bond with one another by grooming. They check each other for parasites and clean themselves. They also bond by eating and sleeping close to one another. What’s for Dinner? Everything!The pygmy marmoset uses its teeth to poke holes in certain trees and vines. Sixty-seven percent of their feeding time is spent eating tree gum or preparing new food sources by gnawing tree trunks or large branches.Monkeys are omnivores. This means they eat a variety of different foods. Many species of monkeys eat fruits, seeds, roots, herbs, and insects. Some monkeys eat very particular types of foods. Pygmy marmosets drill holes in trees and drink the tree sap, called gum. They’ll also eat insects, lizards, spiders, and fruit. Diets of monkeys are so full of variety that in a year a monkey may eat 200 different things! Monkeys Threatened The greatest threat to monkeys is the loss of habitat. Often the building of roads and the logging of forests destroys the areas monkeys use as homes. Without places to live, monkeys are more vulnerable to predators, including human beings who hunt monkeys for food. By focusing on environmental education and preserving habitats as well as making laws to protect monkeys, species including the mandrills, brown spider monkey, and red colobus monkey, may be spared extinction. White-faced capuchins are important to the rainforest because they disperse seeds and pollen so new plants can grow.  Why do you think new plant growth is important for monkeys to.Monkeys are divided into two main groups: Old World monkeys and New World monkeys. These groups have been evolving independently from one another for millions of years.Baby pigtail macaques may be taken by other adult females in the group. All females in the group show great interest in infants, and higher-ranking females often grab lower-ranking females’ infants.Old World monkeys Old World monkeys, such as mandrills and baboons, are native to Africa and Asia. OldWorld monkeys live in a variety of different habitats, from grasslands to rainforests to snowy mountain peaks. They can live in the trees or on the ground. In general, Old World monkeys have: curved nostrils that are close together cheek pouches for storing food sitting pads on their rears tails that cannot grasp limbs and trees Black handed spider monkeys eat a lot of food over a short period of time and they like to eat while hanging, climbing or moving.  Using their prehensile tails to swing through the forest, spider monkeys can move very fast.New World monkeys New World monkeys live in South and Central America and Mexico mostly in the trees in tropical rainforests. In general, New World monkeys have:nostrils that are far apart no cheek pouches no sitting pads on their rears prehensile tails, which can grasp limbs and trees Largest and Smallest MonkeysThe face and rear of the male mandrill can become brighter in color when excited. It becomes more colorful as they get older.  Their blue, red and purple face and rear can help to identify one another when searching for food. Baboons and mandrills weigh in as some of the largest in the monkey world. Both of these Old World monkeys live in Africa. The males weigh up to 30-36 kg. Their primary predators are human beings, who hunt them for food. Mandrills are endangered because of this hunting.The smallest monkey species is the pygmy marmoset, which is a New World monkey. Adults weigh 113 to 119 g. Pygmy marmosets are found in the tropical rainforest in the upper Amazon basin in South America. They live mostly in trees and are active during the day. They are not currently endangered. However, scientists are concerned about their population because pygmy marmosets are increasingly being sold as pets.Breeding During the first month of life, baby olive baboons nurse and sleep frequently with their mother.  As they get older, olive baboons play by themselves or with their peers and they will become more active.Pregnancy and birth in monkeys varies by species. The pygmy marmoset lives in a group of six. Only the dominant female in the group has babies. Offspring are often fraternal twins--the kind of twins that don’t look exactly alike. After birth, the offspring are carried around by the males in the community. They are returned to the mother for nursing. Squirrel monkeys are also New World monkeys, but they have different birth habits. After birth, the newborn clings to its mother’s back rather than being carried by males. Other female squirrel monkeys, rather than males, share newborn care with the mother.Lifespans The lifespan of monkeys depends on the species. In the wild, squirrel monkeys can live up to 20 years. Squirrel monkeys spend their lives in trees and are vulnerable as prey for eagles. Howler monkeys live 15 to 20 years in the wild. Howler monkeys have been hunted and their habitats have been destroyed. This greatly decreases the lifespan of the species. Mandrills live up to 45 years in the wild. They are also hunted for food. Monkey Anatomy Monkeys have bodies that are similar in a lot of ways to our own, with arms, legs, and thumbs that can move easily. They also have flexible arms and legs for grasping and climbing. But you might be surprised that they can not swing through the branches. Only apes and humans can swing from trees, monkey’s shoulders are not designed to allow for swinging.Old World and New World monkeys look considerably different, as you can see below. Baboons are Old World monkeys and capuchins are New World monkeys.An olive baboon troop, or group, forages for food. Troops of olive baboons are mostly made up of females and their young, but include a few males.Many species of monkeys live in groups called troops. Troops allow monkeys to protect themselves from predators, such as humans. In Africa, mandrills can live in troops of up to 45 monkeys. Mandrill troops are led by a dominant male, which has the brightest colors on his face--and also on his rear! The troop also includes several breeding females and their offspring. Western red colobus monkeys live in troops of up to 80 monkeys. The large size of their troops helps protect them from the humans and chimpanzees that hunt them for food. Communication Vocal and visual communication is important to olive baboons.  In the most stressful situations “screams” can be sounded, as a high-pitched and continuous vocalization.  These can be a response to intense emotions of pain, fear, or aggression.Monkeys communicate with hand gestures, facial expressions, and noises called vocalizations. Vocalizations can be quite complex and are often used to warn other monkeys of predators. Mother monkeys can distinguish the vocalizations of their own infants from other babies. There is also evidence that suggests that some monkey species have developed rules for putting together phrases. Staring is thought to be a threat in monkey communities. Staring is often followed by looking away if confrontation is to be avoided. Showing of teeth is often also interpreted as a threat. Here Comes the Groom Monkeys form relationships with other monkeys in their species in different ways. They bond with one another by grooming. They check each other for parasites and clean themselves. They also bond by eating and sleeping close to one another.What’s for Dinner? Everything!The pygmy marmoset uses its teeth to poke holes in certain trees and vines. Sixty-seven percent of their feeding time is spent eating tree gum or preparing new food sources by gnawing tree trunks or large branches.Monkeys are omnivores. This means they eat a variety of different foods. Many species of monkeys eat fruits, seeds, roots, herbs, and insects. Some monkeys eat very particular types of foods. Pygmy marmosets drill holes in trees and drink the tree sap, called gum. They’ll also eat insects, lizards, spiders, and fruit. Diets of monkeys are so full of variety that in a year a monkey may eat 200 different things! Monkeys ThreatenedThe greatest threat to monkeys is the loss of habitat. Often the building of roads and the logging of forests destroys the areas monkeys use as homes. Without places to live, monkeys are more vulnerable to predators, including human beings who hunt monkeys for food. By focusing on environmental education and preserving habitats as well as making laws to protect monkeys, species including the mandrills, brown spider monkey, and red colobus monkey, may be spared extinction.White-faced capuchins are important to the rainforest because they disperse seeds and pollen so new plants can grow.  Why do you think new plant growth is important for monkeys to.The many species of monkey have varied relationships with humans. Some are kept as pets, others used as model organisms in laboratories or in space missions. They may be killed in monkey drives when they threatened agriculture, or used as service animals for the disabled.In some areas, some species of monkey are considered agricultural pests, and can cause extensive damage to commercial and subsistence crops.[6] This can have important implications for the conservation of endangered species, which may be subject to persecution. In some instances farmers' perceptions of the damage may exceed the actual damage.[7] Monkeys that have become habituated to human presence in tourist locations may also be considered pests, attacking tourists.In religion and culture, the monkey often represents quick-wittedness and mischief.As service animals for the disabledSome organizations, for example Helping Hands: Monkey Helpers for the Disabled[9], train capuchin monkeys as monkey helpers to assist quadriplegics and other people with severe spinal cord injuries or mobility impairments. After being socialized in a human home as infants, the monkeys undergo extensive training before being placed with a quadriplegic. Around the house, the monkeys help out by doing tasks including microwaving food, washing the quadriplegic's face and opening drink bottles.In experimentsMain article: Animal testing on non-human primates.Covance primate-testing lab, Vienna, Virginia, 2004–05[10]Macaques, especially the Rhesus Macaque, and African Green Monkeys are widely used in animal testing facilities, either wild-caught or purpose-bred.[11] They are used primarily because of their relative ease of handling, their fast reproductive cycle (compared to apes) and their psychological and physical similarity to humans. In the United States, around 50,000 non-human primates, most of them monkeys, have been used in experiments every year since 1973; 10,000 monkeys were used in the European Union in 2004.Sam, a rhesus macaque, was flown to a height of 55 miles (89 km) by NASA in 1959.The use of monkeys in laboratories is controversial. Animal rights activists claim that their use is cruel and produces little information of value, and there have been many protests, vandalism to testing facilities and threats to workers.[citation needed] Others claim that it has led to many important medical breakthroughs such as the rabies vaccine, understanding of human reproduction and basic knowledge about brain function and that the prevention of harm to humans should be a higher priority than the possible harm done to monkeys. The topic has become a popular cause for animal rights and animal welfare groups.In spaceA number of countries have used monkeys as part of their space exploration programmes, including the United States and France. The first monkey in space was Albert II who flew in the US-launched V-2 rocket on June 14, 1949.As foodMonkey brains are eaten as a delicacy in South East Asia, China, and Africa.[12] In traditional Islamic dietary laws, the eating of monkeys is forbidden. However, monkeys are sometimes eaten in parts of Africa, where they can be sold as "bushmeat".LiteratureSun Wukong (the "Monkey King"), a character who figures prominently in Chinese mythology, is the main protagonist in the classic comic Chinese novel Journey to the West.Monkeys are prevalent in numerous books, television programs, and movies. The television series Monkey and the literary characters Monsieur Eek and Curious George are all examples.Simian statue at a Buddhist shrine in Tokyo, Japan.Informally, the term "monkey" is often used more broadly than in scientific use, and may be used to refer to apes, particularly chimpanzees, gibbons, and gorillas. Author Terry Pratchett alludes to this difference in usage in his Discworld novels, in which the Librarian of the Unseen University is an orangutan who gets very violent if referred to as a monkey.The Winged monkeys are prominent characters in The Wizard of Oz.The simians are split into three groups. The New World monkeys in parvorder Platyrrhini split from the rest of the simian line about 40 million years ago (mya), leaving the parvorder Catarrhini occupying the Old World. This group split about 25 mya between the Old World monkeys and the apes. "Monkeys" are a paraphyletic group (i.e. not a single coherent group). Earlier classifications split the primates into two large groups: the "Prosimii" (strepsirrhines and tarsiers) and the simians in "Anthropoidea" /an'thro-poy'de-a/ (Gr. anthropos, human).The clade Strepsirrhini (New Latin, from Greek strepsis, "a turning" and the stem of rhis, "nose")[2] is one of the two suborders of primates. Madagascar's only non-human primates are strepsirrhines, and others can be found in southeast Asia and Africa. The scientist given credit for the name, Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, named it for the retention of the rhinarium, a trait characterized as a wet nose, generally present in mammals. In his catalog of features attributed to the Strepsirrhini, he lists "Les narines terminales et sinueuses" (translated "sinuous, twisted or curly nostrils").[3][Note 1] Strepsirrhines are often characterized by their wet nose, but the etymology of their group name refers to the sinuous openings of the rhinarium's nostrils.Strepsirrhines are considered by primatologists to have more evolutionarily ancestral features and adaptations than their haplorhine ("dry-nose", in Greek "simple nose") cousins. Their moist nose is connected to the upper lip, which is connected to the gum, limiting the facial expressions that they can manage. Their brain to body ratio tends to be smaller, indicating a lower intelligence. Their brain's olfactory lobes are larger, lending to the notion that they have a stronger reliance on smell. Their snouts are generally elongated, giving them a dog-like appearance, although this is true of some monkeys, too. Strepsirrhines have a postorbital bar, unlike haplorrhines. The strepsirrhines have also retained the ability to enzymatically manufacture vitamin C, which has been lost by all the haplorrhines, including the Tarsiidae.With the exception of the Aye-aye, all strepsirrhines have a toothcomb—tightly clustered incisors and canine teeth—that is used for grooming. Another grooming adaptation is a toilet-claw on the second toe of all strepsirrhines, while the big toe is widely separated from the others allowing a vise-like grip for locomotion.About 75% of species are nocturnal and all of these have a tapetum, a shiny, reflective layer in the back of their eyes, although several diurnal species like the Ring-tailed Lemur have it as well. Many of the nocturnal species also have very sensitive hearing and ears they can move independently, allowing them to capture sounds even better.Strepsirrhine reproduction differs greatly from haplorrhine reproduction. Instead of an individual cycle, strepsirrhines have a breeding season. They also have a litter of offspring and the females have a Y-shaped (bicornate) uterus and multiple sets of nipples.The haplorhines, the "dry-nosed" primates (the Greek name means "simple-nosed"), are members of the Haplorhini clade: the prosimian tarsiers and the anthropoids. The anthropoids are the catarrhines (Old World monkeys and apes, including humans) and the platyrrhines (New World monkeys).The omomyids are an extinct group of prosimians, believed to be more closely related to the tarsiers than to any strepsirrhines, and are considered the most primitive haplorhines.Haplorhines share a number of derived features that distinguish them from the strepsirrhine "wet-nosed" primates (whose Greek name means "curved nose"), the other suborder of primates from which they parted in evolution some 63 million years ago. The haplorhines, including tarsiers, have all lost the function of the terminal enzyme which manufactures vitamin C, while the strepsirrhine prosimians, like most other orders of mammals, have retained this enzyme and the ability to manufacture vitamin C.[2] The haplorhine upper lip, which has replaced the ancestral rhinarium found in strepsirrhines, is not directly connected to their nose or gum, allowing a large range of facial expressions. Their brain to body ratio is significantly greater than the strepsirrhines, and their primary sense is vision. Haplorhines have a postorbital plate, unlike the postorbital bar found in strepsirhines. Most species are diurnal (the exceptions being the tarsiers and the night monkeys).All anthropoids have a single-chambered uterus; tarsiers have a bicornate uterus like the strepsirrhines. Most species typically have single births, although twins and triplets are common for marmosets and tamarins. Despite similar gestation periods, haplorhine newborns are relatively much larger than strepsirrhine newborns, but have a longer dependence period on their mother. This difference in size and dependence is credited to the increased complexity of their behavior and natural history.Tarsiiformes are a group of primates that was once ranged across Europe, northern Africa, Asia, and North America, but today all living species are found in the islands of Southeast Asia. Tarsiers (family Tarsiidae) are the only living members of the infraorder, and also include the extinct Tarsius eocaenus from the Eocene[2] and Tarsius thailandicus from the Miocene.[3] Two extinct genera, Xanthorhysis and Afrotarsius, are considered to be close relatives of the living tarsiers and are generally classified within Tarsiiformes, with the former grouped within family Tarsiidae and the latter listed as incertae sedis (undefined).[2] Omomyids are generally considered to be extinct relatives, or even ancestors, of the living tarsiers and are often classified within Tarsiiformes. Other fossil primates, which include Microchoeridae, Carpolestidae,[4] and Eosimiidae,[5] have been included in this classification, although the fossil evidence is debated. Eosimiidae has also been classified under the infraorder Simiiformes (with monkeys and apes).[6] Likewise, Carpolestidae is often classified within the order Plesiadapiformes, a very close, extinct relative of primates.[7] These conflicting classifications lie at the heart of the debate over early primate evolution. Even the placement of Tarsiiformes within suborder Haplorrhini (with the monkeys and apes or "higher primates") is still debated.New World monkeys are the five families of primates that are found in Central and South America: Callitrichidae, Cebidae, Aotidae, Pitheciidae, and Atelidae. The five families are ranked together as the Platyrrhini parvorder and the Ceboidea superfamily, which are essentially synonymous since Ceboidea is the only living platyrrhine superfamily.[3] They differ from other groupings of monkeys and primates, such as the Old World monkeys and the apes.New World monkeys are small to mid-sized primates, ranging from the Pygmy Marmoset (the world's smallest monkey), at 14 to 16 cm (5.5 to 6.3 in) and a weight of 120 to 190 grams (4.2 to 6.7 oz) to the Southern Muriqui, at 55 to 70 cm (22 to 28 in) and a weight of 12 to 15 kg (26 to 33 lbs). New World monkeys differ slightly from Old World monkeys in several aspects. The most prominent phenotype distinction is the nose, which is the feature used most commonly to distinguish between the two groups. The scientific name for the New World monkeys, Platyrrhini, means "flat nosed". The noses of New World monkeys are flatter than the narrow noses of the Old World monkeys, and have side-facing nostrils. New World monkeys are the only monkeys with prehensile tails—in comparison with the shorter, non-grasping tails of the anthropoids of the Old World.New World monkeys (except for the howler monkeys of genus Alouatta)[4] also typically lack the trichromatic vision of Old World monkeys.[5] Colour vision in New World primates relies on a single gene on the X-chromosome to produce pigments that absorb medium and long wavelength light, which contrasts with short wavelength light. As a result, males rely on a single medium/long pigment gene and are dichromatic, as are homozygous females. Heterozygous females may possess two alleles with different sensitivities within this range, and so can display trichromatic vision.Platyrrhines also differ from Old World monkeys in that they have twelve premolars instead of eight; having a dental formula of  (consisting of 2 incisors, 1 canine, 3 premolars, and 3 molars. This is in contrast with Old World Anthropoids, including humans, gorillas, chimps, bonobos, siamangs, gibbons and orangutans, which share a dental formula of ) New World monkeys in the family Atelidae are the only primates with tails that are prehensile. Many New World monkeys are small and almost all are arboreal, so knowledge of them is less comprehensive than that of the more easily observed Old World monkeys. Unlike most Old World monkeys, many New World monkeys form monogamous pair bonds, and show substantial paternal care of young.[7] They eat fruits, nuts, insects, flowers, bird eggs, spiders, and small mammals. Unlike humans and most Old World monkeys, their thumbs are not opposable [8] (except for some Cebids).About 40 million years ago the Simiiformes infraorder split into parvorders Platyrrhini (New World monkeys—in South America) and Catarrhini (apes and Old World monkeys—in Africa).[9] The Platyrrhini are currently conjectured to have migrated across the Atlantic Ocean to South America on a raft of vegetation.At that time, the Isthmus of Panama had not yet formed, ocean currents and climate were quite different, and the Atlantic Ocean was less than the present 2,800 km (1,700 mi) width by about a third; possibly 1,000 km less, based on the current estimate of the Atlantic mid-ocean ridge formation processes spreading rate of 25 mm/year.The night monkeys, also known as the owl monkeys or douroucoulis, are the members of the genus Aotus of New World monkeys (monotypic in family Aotidae). They are widely distributed in the forests of Central and South America, from Panama south to Paraguay and northern Argentina. The species that live at higher elevations tend to have thicker fur than the monkeys at sea level. The genus name means "earless"; they have ears, of course, but the external ears are tiny and hard to see. Night monkeys have big brown eyes and therefore have increased ability to be active at night. They are called night monkeys because all species are active at night and are in fact the only truly nocturnal monkeys (an exception is the subspecies Aotus azarae azarae, which is cathemeral).[2] Both male and female Night Monkeys weigh almost the same amount. For example, in one of these Night Monkeys, A. azarae, the male weighs 2.76 pounds while the female weighs 2.75 pounds.Night monkeys make a notably wide variety of vocal sounds, with up to eight categories of distinct calls (gruff grunts, resonant grunts, screams, low trills, moans, gulps, sneeze grunts and hoots), and a frequency range of 190-1,950 Hz.[3] Unusual among the New World monkeys, they are monochromats, that is, they have no colour vision, presumably because it is of no advantage given their nocturnal habits. They have a better spatial resolution at low light levels than other primates which contributes to their ability to capture insects and move at night.All night monkeys form pair bonds, and live in family groups of the mated pair with their immature offspring. Family groups defend territories by vocal calls and scent marking. Only one infant is born each year. The male is the primary caregiver, and the mother only carries the infant for the first week or so of its life.Night monkeys constitute one of the few monkey species that are affected by the often deadly human malaria protozoan Plasmodium falciparum, making them useful as non-human primate experimental models in malaria research.Pithecids are small to medium monkeys, ranging from 23 cm in head-body length, for the smaller titis, to 44-49 cm in the uakaris. They have medium to long fur, in a wide range of colors, often with contrasting patches, especially on the face.They are diurnal and arboreal animals, found in tropical forests from low-lying swamp to mountain slopes. They are predominantly herbivorous, eating mostly fruit and seeds, although some species will also eat a small number of insects. Sakis and uakaris have a diastema between the canine and premolar teeth, but the titis, which have unusually small canines for New World monkeys, do not.[2] All species have the dental formula: 
Females give birth to a single young after a gestation period of between four to six months, depending on species. The uakaris and bearded sakis are polygamous, living in groups of 8-30 individuals. Each group has multiple males, which establish a dominance hierarchy amongst themselves. The titis and Pithecia sakis, by contrast, are monogamous and live in much smaller family groups.Atelid monkeys are small to moderate in size, ranging from 34 to 72 cm in head-body length, with the howler monkeys being the largest, and the spider monkeys the smallest, members of the group. They have long prehensile tails with a sensitive, almost hairless tactile pad on the underside of the distal part. The tail is frequently used as 'fifth limb' while moving through the trees where they make their homes. They also have nails on their fingers and toes, enabling them to climb. Most species have predominantly dark brown, grey, or black fur, often with paler markings.These are arboreal and diurnal animals, with most species restricted to dense rain forest, although some howler monkey species are found in drier forests, or wooded savannah. They mainly eat fruit and leaves, although the smaller species, in particular, may also eat some small insects. They have the dental formula: Females give birth to a single infant (or, rarely, twins) after a gestation period of 180 to 225 days. In most species, individuals give birth every one to three years, and there is little, if any, seasonal peak in the number of births.Atelid monkeys are typically polygamous, and live in social groups with anything up to twenty five adults, depending on species. Where groups are relatively small, as is common amongst the howler monkeys, a single male monopolises a 'harem' of females, but larger groups will contain several males, with a clear hierarchy of dominance.Monkeys have many different adaptations, depending on their habitat. Most are arboreal. Others, like macaques Macaca sp. and baboons Papio sp., are more terrestrial. All monkeys can use their hands and feet for holding on to branches, but some arboreal monkeys can use their tails, too. Tails that can grab and hold are called prehensile. These special tails are ridged on the underside and very flexible, so much so that they can grab a tree branch or pick up something as small as a peanut! Prehensile tails come in handy for holding on while the monkey collects food: flowers, fruits, nuts, leaves, seeds, insects, birds’ eggs, spiders, and small mammals.Monkeys at the San Diego Zoo and the San Diego Zoo Safari Park are offered a variety of fruits and vegetables, special herbivore biscuits, and a variety of leafy branches to munch on.Monkeys are found in two main regions of the world, so they are grouped by scientists into either Old World monkeys or New World monkeys. Old World monkeys are found in Africa and Asia. Some examples are guenons Cercopithecus sp., mangabeys Cercocebus sp., macaques, baboons, and colobus Colobus sp. monkeys. New World monkeys are found in Mexico, Central America, and South America. Some examples are woolly monkeys Lagothrix sp., spider monkeys Ateles sp., howler monkeys Alouatta sp., capuchin monkeys Cebus sp., and squirrel monkeys Saimiri sciureus. Marmosets and tamarins also live in the New World, but are in a different scientific grouping from the other New World monkeys.There are a few characteristics that are different between the Old World and New World monkeys:Groups of monkeys, called troops, travel together to find food. Infants are helpless at birth, so they get rides by clinging to their mothers. When the troop is not traveling, monkey babies are very active, spending much of their waking hours playing. Playing helps young monkeys develop physical and social skills they need for adult life.Monkeys are very social animals, so it is important that they communicate well in order to get along in their large groups. They use vocalizations, facial expressions, and body movements to get their messages across. Staring, for instance, is a threat. Monkeys look down or away to avoid threatening other monkeys, thus preventing fights. Loud vocalizations can mean "stay out—this is my territory.” Using vocalizations instead of fighting is a much safer way to communicate.Grinning, or pulling the lip up to show the teeth, may seem like a smile to us. But for monkeys this is a sign of aggression or anger because biting is one way monkeys fight and defend themselves. Other signs of aggression include head bobbing, yawning (again, to show the teeth), and jerking the head and shoulders forward. Monkeys also express affection and make peace with others by grooming each other. Although grooming helps monkeys keep their fur clean of dirt, dead skin, and parasites, it also helps them to build and maintain good social relationships. Grooming seems to be a way to make up after fighting or to make friends with other troop members.Helping monkeys survive
Unless human behavior changes, monkeys have an uncertain future. Many live in areas where people live. Monkeys are often considered pests by farmers and are killed. Some are killed for their fur and for meat, which is known as bushmeat. Monkeys are also trapped and sold as pets. People need to remember that monkeys are wild animals, and they do not make good pets. They are loud, messy, difficult to care for, and can be aggressive. Monkeys can also become very sick from not getting the right food, and they lead unhappy and short lives from not living in the right conditions.The biggest threat to monkeys is habitat loss. Many monkeys live in tropical forests, a habitat that is quickly disappearing. You can help protect monkeys and monkey habitat! Do not buy anything made from monkey body parts. Be careful about buying items made from rain forest trees, unless that wood is certified. Some rain forest products, such as Brazil nuts, actually help protect monkey habitat, because they can only be harvested from healthy rain forests. This type of product usually has a label describing how it helps protect the rain forest. Read the labels! Recycling and buying recycled products also helps save all animal habitats by reducing the amount of resources we take from the Earth. Cheek pouches— Macaques and some of the other Old World monkeys have cheek pouches, which are used to stuff food into on the run so it can be chewed later. New World monkeys don’t have cheek pouches. 

























 
 


 

 

 











































