that of abstract Right; moreover, because the government as the
concrete centre of the power of the State, could not adopt as its
principle abstract individual wills, and reconstruct the State on
this basis; lastly, because it was Catholic, and therefore the Idea
of Freedom — Reason embodied in Laws — did not pass for the
final absolute obligation, since the Holy and the religious
conscience are separated from them. The conception, the idea of
Right asserted its authority all at once, and the old framework of
injustice could offer no resistance to its onslaught. A
constitution, therefore, was established in harmony with the
conception of Right, and on this foundation all future legislation
was to be based. Never since the sun had stood in the firmament
and the planets revolved around him had it been perceived that
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 467
man’s existence centres in his head, i.e., in Thought, inspired by
which he builds up the world of reality. Anaxagoras had been the
first to say that 	; governs the World; but not until now had
man advanced to the recognition of the principle that Thought
ought to govern spiritual reality, This was accordingly a glorious
mental dawn. All thinking beings shared in the jubilation of this
epoch. Emotions of a lofty character stirred men’s minds at that
time; a spiritual enthusiasm thrilled through the world, as if the
reconciliation between the Divine and the Secular was now first
accomplished.
The two following points must now occupy our attention: 1st.
The course which the Revolution in France took; 2d. How that
Revolution became World-Historical.
1. Freedom presents two aspects: the one concerns its
substance and purport — its objectivity — the thing itself —
[that which is performed as a free act]; the other relates to the
Form of Freedom, involving the consciousness of his activity on
the part of the individual; for Freedom demands that the
individual recognize himself in such acts, that they should be
veritably his, it being his interest that the result in question
should be attained. The three elements and powers of the State
in actual working must be contemplated according to the above
analysis, their examination in detail being referred to the
Lectures on the Philosophy of Right.
(1.) Laws of Rationality — of intrinsic Right — Objective or
Real Freedom: to this category belong Freedom of Property and
Freedom of Person. Those relics of that condition of servitude
which the feudal relation had introduced are hereby swept away,
and all those fiscal ordinances which were the bequest of the
feudal law — its tithes and dues, are abrogated. Real [practical]
Liberty requires moreover freedom in regard to trades and
professions — the permission to every one to use his abilities
without restriction — and the free admission to all offices of
State. This is a summary of the elements of real Freedom, and
which are not based on feeling — for feeling allows of the
continuance even of serfdom and slavery — but on the thought
and self- consciousness of man recognizing the spiritual
character of his existence.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 468
(2.) But the agency which gives the laws practical effect is the
Government generally. Government is primarily the formal
execution of the laws and the maintenance of their authority: in
respect to foreign relations it prosecutes the interest of the State;
that is, it assists the independence of the nation as an
individuality against other nations; lastly, it has to provide for the
internal weal of the State and all its classes — what is called
administration: for it is not enough that the citizen is allowed to
pursue a trade or calling, it must also be a source of gain to him;
it is not enough that men are permitted to use their powers, they
must also find an opportunity of applying them to purpose. Thus
the State involves a body of abstract principles and a practical
application of them. This application must be the work of a
subjective will, a will which resolves and decides. Legislation
itself — the invention and positive enactment of these statutory
arrangements, is an application of such general principles. The
next step, then, consists in [specific] determination and
execution. Here then the question presents itself: what is the
decisive will to be? The ultimate decision is the prerogative of
the monarch: but if the State is based on Liberty, the many wills
of individuals also desire to have a share in political decisions.
But the Many are All; and it seems but a poor expedient, rather
a monstrous inconsistency, to allow only a few to take part in
those decisions, since each wishes that his volition should have
a share in determining what is to be law for him. The Few
assume to be the deputies, but they are often only the despoilers
of the Many. Nor is the sway of the Majority over the Minority
a less palpable inconsistency.
(3.) This collision of subjective wills leads therefore to the
consideration of a third point, that of Disposition — an ex animo
acquiescence in the laws; not the mere customary observance of
them, but the cordial recognition of laws and the Constitution as
in principle fixed and immutable, and of the supreme obligation
of individuals to subject their particular wills to them. There may
be various opinions and views respecting laws, constitution and
government, but there must be a disposition on the part of the
citizens to regard all these opinions as subordinate to the
substantial interest of the State, and to insist upon them no
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 469
further than that interest will allow; moreover nothing must be
considered higher and more sacred than good will towards the
State; or, if Religion be looked upon as higher and more sacred,
it must involve nothing really alien or opposed to the
Constitution. It is, indeed, regarded as a maxim of the
profoundest wisdom entirely to separate the laws and
constitution of the State from Religion, since bigotry and
hypocrisy are to be feared as the results of a State Religion. But
although the aspects of Religion and the State are different, they
are radically one; and the laws find their highest confirmation in
Religion.
Here it must be frankly stated, that with the Catholic Religion
no rational constitution is possible; for Government and People
must reciprocate that final guarantee of Disposition, and can
have it only in a Religion that is not opposed to a rational
political constitution.
Plato in his Republic makes everything depend upon the
Government, and makes Disposition the principle of the State; on
which account he lays the chief stress on Education. The modern
theory is diametrically opposed to this, referring everything to
the individual will. But here we have no guarantee that the will
in question has that right disposition which is essential to the
stability of the State.
In view then of these leading considerations we have to trace
the course of the French Revolution and the remodelling of the
State in accordance with the Idea of Right. In the first instance
purely abstract philosophical principles were set up: Disposition
and Religion were not taken into account. The first
Constitutional form of Government in France was one which
recognized Royalty; the monarch was to stand at the head of the
State, and on him in conjunction with his Ministers was to
devolve the executive power; the legislative body on the other
hand were to make the laws. But this constitution involved from
the very first an internal contradiction; for the legislature
absorbed the whole power of the administration: the budget,
affairs of war and peace, and the levying of the armed force were
in the hands of the Legislative Chamber. Everything was brought
under the head of Law. The budget however is in its nature
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 470
something diverse from law, for it is annually renewed, and the
power to which it properly belongs is that of the Government.
With this moreover is connected the indirect nomination of the
ministry and officers of state, etc. The government was thus
transferred to the Legislative Chamber, as in England to the
Parliament. This constitution was also vitiated by the existence
of absolute mistrust; the dynasty lay under suspicion, because it
had lost the power it formerly enjoyed, and the priests refused
the oath. Neither government nor constitution could be
maintained on this footing, and the ruin of both was the result. A
government of some kind however is always in existence. The
question presents itself then, Whence did it emanate?
Theoretically, it proceeded from the people; really and truly from
the National Convention and its Committees. The forces now
dominant are the abstract principles — Freedom, and, as it exists
within the limits of the Subjective Will — Virtue. This Virtue
has now to conduct the government in opposition to the Many,
whom their corruption and attachment to old interests, or a
liberty that has degenerated into license, and the violence of their
passions, render unfaithful to virtue. Virtue is here a simple
abstract principle and distinguishes the citizens into two classes
only — those who are favorably disposed and those who are not.
But disposition can only be recognized and judged of by
disposition. Suspicion therefore is in the ascendant; but virtue, as
soon as it becomes liable to suspicion, is already condemned.
Suspicion attained a terrible power and brought to the scaffold
the Monarch, whose subjective will was in fact the religious
conscience of a Catholic. Robespierre set up the principle of
Virtue as supreme, and it may be said that with this man Virtue
was an earnest matter. Virtue and Terror are the order of the day;
for Subjective Virtue, whose sway is based on disposition only,
brings with it the most fearful tyranny. It exercises its power
without legal formalities, and the punishment it inflicts is equally
simple — Death. This tyranny could not last; for all inclinations,
all interests, reason itself revolted against this terribly consistent
Liberty, which in its concentrated intensity exhibited so fanatical
a shape. An organized government is introduced, analogous to
the one that had been displaced; only that its chief and monarch
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 471
is now a mutable Directory of Five, who may form a moral, but
have not an individual unity; under them also suspicion was in
the ascendant, and the government was in the hands of the
legislative assemblies; this constitution therefore experienced the
same fate as its predecessor, for it had proved to itself the
absolute necessity of a governmental power. Napoleon restored
it as a military power, and followed up this step by establishing
himself as an individual will at the head of the State: he knew
how to rule, and soon settled the internal affairs of France. The
avocats, idealogues and abstract-principle men who ventured to
show themselves he sent “to the right about,” and the sway of
mistrust was exchanged for that of respect and fear. He then,
with the vast might of his character turned his attention to foreign
relations, subjected all Europe, and diffused his liberal
institutions in every quarter. Greater victories were never gained,
expeditions displaying greater genius were never conducted: but
never was the powerlessness of Victory exhibited in a clearer
light than then. The disposition of the peoples, i.e. their religious
disposition and that of their nationality, ultimately precipitated
this colossus; and in France constitutional monarchy, with the
“Charte” as its basis, was restored. But here again the antithesis
of Disposition [good feeling] and Mistrust made its appearance.
The French stood in a mendacious position to each other, when
they issued addresses full of devotion and love to the monarchy,
and loading it with benediction. A fifteen years’ farce was
played. For although the Charte was the standard under which all
were enrolled, and though both parties had sworn to it, yet on the
one side the ruling disposition was a Catholic one, which
regarded it as a matter of conscience to destroy the existing
institutions. Another breach, therefore, took place, and the
Government was overturned. At length, after forty years of war
and confusion indescribable, a weary heart might fain
congratulate itself on seeing a termination and tranquillization of
all these disturbances. But although one main point is set at rest,
there remains on the one hand that rupture which the Catholic
principle inevitably occasions, on the other hand that which has
to do with men’s subjective will. In regard to the latter, the main
feature of incompatibility still presents itself, in the requirement
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 472
that the ideal general will should also be the empirically general
— i.e. that the units of the State, in their individual capacity,
should rule, or at any rate take part in the government. Not
satisfied with the establishment of rational rights, with freedom
of person and property, with the existence of a political
organization in which are to be found various circles of civil life
each having its own functions to perform, and with that influence
over the people which is exercised by the intelligent members of
the community, and the confidence that is felt in them,
“Liberalism” sets up in opposition to all this the atomistic
principle, that which insists upon the sway of individual wills;
maintaining that all government should emanate from their
express power, and have their express sanction. Asserting this
formal side of Freedom — this abstraction — the party in
question allows no political organization to be firmly established.
The particular arrangements of the government are forthwith
opposed by the advocates of Liberty as the mandates of a
particular will, and branded as displays of arbitrary power. The
will of the Many expels the Ministry from power, and those who
had formed the Opposition fill the vacant places; but the latter
having now become the Government, meet with hostility from
the Many, and share the same fate. Thus agitation and unrest are
perpetuated. This collision, this nodus, this problem is that with
which history is now occupied, and whose solution it has to work
out in the future.
2. We have now to consider the French Revolution in its
organic connection with the History of the World; for in its
substantial import that event is World-Historical, and that contest
of Formalism which we discussed in the last paragraph must be
properly distinguished from its wider bearings. As regards
outward diffusion its principle gained access to almost all
modern states, either through conquest or by express introduction
into their political life. Particularly all the Romanic nations, and
the Roman Catholic World in special — France, Italy, Spain —
were subjected to the dominion of Liberalism. But it became
bankrupt everywhere; first, the grand firm in France, then its
branches in Spain and Italy; twice, in fact, in the states into
which it had been introduced. This was the case in Spain, where
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 473
it was first brought in by the Napoleonic Constitution, then by
that which the Cortes adopted — in Piedmont, first when it was
incorporated with the French Empire, and a second time as the
result of internal insurrection; so in Rome and in Naples it was
twice set up. Thus Liberalism as an abstraction, emanating from
France, traversed the Roman World; but Religious slavery held
that world in the fetters of political servitude. For it is a false
principle that the fetters which bind Right and Freedom can be
broken without the emancipation of conscience — that there can
be a Revolution without a Reformation. — These countries,
therefore, sank back into their old condition — in Italy with
some modifications of the outward political condition. Venice
and Genoa, those ancient aristocracies, which could at least boast
of legitimacy, vanished as rotten despotisms. Material superiority
in power can achieve no enduring results: Napoleon could not
coerce Spain into freedom any more than Philip II could force
Holland into slavery.
Contrasted with these Romanic nations we observe the other
powers of Europe, and especially the Protestant nations. Austria
and England were not drawn within the vortex of internal
agitation, and exhibited great, immense proofs of their internal
solidity. Austria is not a Kingdom, but an Empire, i.e., an
aggregate of many political organizations. The inhabitants of its
chief provinces are not German in origin and character, and have
remained unaffected by “ideas.” Elevated neither by education
nor religion, the lower classes in some districts have remained in
a condition of serfdom, and the nobility have been kept down, as
in Bohemia; in other quarters, while the former have continued
the same, the barons have maintained their despotism, as in
Hungary. Austria has surrendered that more intimate connection
with Germany which was derived from the imperial dignity, and
renounced its numerous possessions and rights in Germany and
the Netherlands. It now takes its place in Europe as a distinct
power, involved with no other. England, with great exertions,
maintained itself on its old foundations ; the English Constitution
kept its ground amid the general convulsion, though it seemed so
much the more liable to be affected by it, as a public Parliament,
that habit of assembling in public meeting which was common
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 474
to all orders of the state, and a free press, offered singular
facilities for introducing the French principles of Liberty and
Equality among all classes of the people. Was the English nation
too backward in point of culture to apprehend these general
principles? Yet in no country has the question of Liberty been
more frequently a subject of reflection and public discussion. Or
was the English constitution so entirely a Free Constitution —
had those principles been already so completely realized in it,
that they could no longer excite opposition or even interest? The
English nation may be said to have approved of the emancipation
of France; but it was proudly reliant on its own constitution and
freedom, and instead of imitating the example of the foreigner,
it displayed its ancient hostility to its rival, and was soon
involved in a popular war with France.
The Constitution of England is a complex of mere particular
Rights and particular privileges: the Government is essentially
administrative — that is, conservative of the interests of all
particular orders and classes; and each particular Church,
parochial district, county, society, takes care of itself, so that the
Government, strictly speaking, has nowhere less to do than in
England. This is the leading feature of what Englishmen call
their Liberty, and is the very antithesis of such a centralized
administration as exists in France, where down to the least
village the Maire is named by the Ministry or their agents.
Nowhere can people less tolerate free action on the part of others
than in France: there the Ministry combines in itself all
administrative power, to which, on the other hand, the Chamber
of Deputies lays claim. In England, on the contrary, every parish,
every subordinate division and association has a part of its own
to perform. Thus the common interest is concrete, and particular
interests are taken cognizance of and determined in view of that
common interest. These arrangements, based on particular
interests, render a general system impossible. Consequently,
abstract and general principles have no attraction for Englishmen
— are addressed in their case to inattentive ears. — The
particular interests above referred to have positive rights attached
to them, which date from the antique times of Feudal Law, and
have been preserved in England more than in any other country.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 475
By an inconsistency of the most startling kind, we find them
contravening equity most grossly; and of institutions
characterized by real freedom there are nowhere fewer than in
England. In point of private right and freedom of possession they
present an incredible deficiency: sufficient proof of which is
afforded in the rights of primogeniture, involving the necessity
of purchasing or otherwise providing military or ecclesiastical
appointments for the younger sons of the aristocracy.
The Parliament governs, although Englishmen are unwilling
to allow that such is the case. It is worthy of remark, that what
has been always regarded as the period of the corruption of a
republican people, presents itself here; viz. election to seats in
parliament by means of bribery. But this also they call freedom
— the power to sell one’s vote, and to purchase a seat in
parliament.
But this utterly inconsistent and corrupt state of things has
nevertheless one advantage, that it provides for the possibility of
a government — that it introduces a majority of men into
parliament who are statesmen, who from their very youth have
devoted themselves to political business and have worked and
lived in it. And the nation has the correct conviction and
perception that there must be a government, and is therefore
willing to give its confidence to a body of men who have had
experience in governing; for a general sense of particularity
involves also a recognition of that form of particularity which is
a distinguishing feature of one class of the community — that
knowledge, experience, and facility acquired by practice, which
the aristocracy who devote themselves to such interests
exclusively possess. This is quite opposed to the appreciation of
principles and abstract views which everyone can understand at
once, and which are besides to be found in all Constitutions and
Charters. It is a question whether the Reform in Parliament now
on the tapis, consistently carried out, will leave the possibility of
a Government.
The material existence of England is based on commerce and
industry, and the English have undertaken the weighty
responsibility of being the missionaries of civilization to the
world; for their commercial spirit urges them to traverse every
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 476
sea and land, to form connections with barbarous peoples, to
create wants and stimulate industry, and first and foremost to
establish among them the conditions necessary to commerce, viz.
the relinquishment of a life of lawless violence, respect for
property, and civility to strangers.
Germany was traversed by the victorious French hosts, but
German nationality delivered it from this yoke. One of the
leading features in the political condition of Germany is that
code of Rights which was certainly occasioned by French
oppression, since this was the especial means of bringing to light
the deficiencies of the old system. The fiction of an Empire has
utterly vanished. It is broken up into sovereign states. Feudal
obligations are abolished, for freedom of property and of person
have been recognized as fundamental principles. Offices of State
are open to every citizen, talent and adaptation being of course
the necessary conditions. The government rests with the official
world, and the personal decision of the monarch constitutes its
apex; for a final decision is, as was remarked above, absolutely
necessary. Yet with firmly established laws, and a settled
organization of the State, what is left to the sole arbitrament of
the monarch is, in point of substance, no great matter. It is
certainly a very fortunate circumstance for a nation, when a
sovereign of noble character falls to its lot; yet in a great state
even this is of small moment, since its strength lies in the Reason
incorporated in it. Minor states have their existence and
tranquillity secured to them more or less by their neighbors: they
are therefore, properly speaking, not independent, and have not
the fiery trial of war to endure. As has been remarked, a share in
the government may be obtained by every one who has a
competent knowledge, experience, and a morally regulated will.
Those who know ought to govern —  , not ignorance
and the presumptuous conceit of “knowing better.” Lastly, as to
Disposition, we have already remarked that in the Protestant
Church the reconciliation of Religion with Legal Right has taken
place. In the Protestant world there is no sacred, no religious
conscience in a state of separation from, or perhaps even hostility
to Secular Right.
This is the point which consciousness has attained, and these
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 477
Mr. G. H. Lewes, in his Biographical History of Philosophy,
Vol. IV, Ed. 1841.
I cannot mention any work that will serve as a compendium
of the course, but I may remark that in my “Outlines of the
Philosophy of Law,” §§341–360, I have already given a
definition of such a Universal History as it is proposed to
develop, and a syllabus of the chief elements or periods into
are the principal phases of that form in which the principle of
Freedom has realized itself; — for the History of the World is
nothing but the development of the Idea of Freedom. But
Objective Freedom — the laws of real Freedom — demand the
subjugation of the mere contingent Will — for this is in its nature
formal. If the Objective is in itself Rational, human insight and
conviction must correspond with the Reason which it embodies,
and then we have the other essential element — Subjective
Freedom — also realized.45 We have confined ourselves to the
consideration of that progress of the Idea [which has led to this
consummation], and have been obliged to forego the pleasure of
giving a detailed picture of the prosperity, the periods of glory
that have distinguished the career of peoples, the beauty and
grandeur of the character of individuals, and the interest
attaching to their fate in weal or woe. Philosophy concerns itself
only with the glory of the Idea mirroring itself in the History of
the World. Philosophy escapes from the weary strife of passions
that agitate the surface of society into the calm region of
contemplation; that which interests it is the recognition of the
process of development which the Idea has passed through in
realizing itself — i.e., the Idea of Freedom, whose reality is the
consciousness of Freedom and nothing short of it.
That the History of the World, with all the changing scenes
which its annals present, is this process of development and the
realization of Spirit — this is the true Theodicaea, the
justification of God in History. Only this insight can reconcile
Spirit with the History of the World — viz., that what has
happened, and is happening every day, is not only not “without
God,” but is essentially His Work.
Notes
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 478
which it naturally divides itself.
Fr. von Schlegel, “Philosophy of History,” p. 91, Bohn’s
Standard Library.
We have to thank this interest for many valuable discoveries
in Oriental literature, and for a renewed study of treasures
previously known, in the department of ancient Asiatic
Culture, Mythology, Religions, and History. In Catholic
countries, where a refined literary taste prevails, Governments
have yielded to the requirements of speculative inquiry, and
have felt the necessity of allying themselves with learning and
philosophy. Eloquently and impressively has the Abbé
Lamennais reckoned it among the criteria of the true religion,
that it must be the universal — that is, catholic — and the
oldest in date; and the Congregation has labored zealously and
diligently in France towards rendering such assertions no
longer mere pulpit tirades and authoritative dicta, such as were
deemed sufficient formerly. The religion of Buddha — a godman
— which has prevailed to such an enormous extent, has
especially attracted attention. The Indian Timûrtis, as also the
Chinese abstraction of the Trinity, has furnished clearer
evidence in point of subject matter. The savants, M. Abel
Remusat and M. Saint Martin, on the one hand, have
undertaken the most meritorious investigations in the Chinese
literature, with a view to make this also a base of operations
for researches in the Mongolian and, if such were possible, in
the Thibetan; on the other hand, Baron von Eckstein — in his
way (i.e., adopting from Germany superficial physical
conceptions and mannerisms, in the style of Fr. v. Schlegel,
though with more geniality than the latter) in his periodical,
“Le Catholique” — has furthered the cause of that primitive
Catholicism generally, and in particular has gained for the
savans of the Congregation the support of the Government; so
that it has even set on foot expeditions to the East, in order to
discover there treasures still concealed; (from which further
disclosures have been anticipated, respecting profound
theological questions, particularly on the higher antiquity and
sources of Buddhism), and with a view to promote the
interests of Catholicism by this circuitous but scientifically
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 479
interesting method.
German, “Gesckichte” from “Geschehen,” to happen. — ED.
Vide Hegel’s “Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der
Religion,” I. 284 and 289. 2d Ed.
The essence of Spirit is self-determination or “Freedom.”
Where Spirit has attained mature growth, as in the man who
acknowledges the absolute validity of the dictates of
Conscience, the Individual is “a law to himself,” and this
Freedom is “realized.” But in lower stages of morality and
civilization, he unconsciously projects this legislative principle
into some “governing power” (one or several), and obeys it as
if it were an alien, extraneous force, not the voice of that Spirit
of which he himself (though at this stage imperfectly) is an
embodiment. The Philosophy of History exhibits the
successive stages by which he reaches the consciousness, that
it is his own inmost being that thus governs him — i.e., a
consciousness of self-determination or “Freedom.” — ED.
It is evident that the term “moral standpoint” is used here in
the strict sense in which Hegel has defined it, in his
“Philosophy of Law,” as that of the self-determination of
subjectivity, free conviction of the Good. The reader,
therefore, should not misunderstand the use that continues to
be made of the terms, morality, moral government, etc., in
reference to the Chinese; as they denote morality only in the
loose and ordinary meaning of the word — precepts or
commands given with a view to producing good behavior —
without bringing into relief the element of internal conviction.
— ED.
Vide Hegel’s “Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der
Philosophie,” vol. i. p. 138, etc.
Only recently has Professor Rosen, residing in London, gone
thoroughly into the matter and given a specimen of the text
with a translation, Rig-Veda; Specimen, ed. Fr. Rosen. Lond.
1830.” (More recently, since Rosen’s death, the whole Rig-
Veda, London, 1839, has been published from MSS. left by
him.)
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 480
“A. W. v. Schlegel has published the first and second
Volume; the most important Episodes of the Mahabharata
have been introduced to public notice by F. Bopp, and a
complete Edition has appeared at Calcutta.” — German
Editor.
As in Hegel’s original plan and in the first lecture the
transition from Indian Brahminism to Buddhism occupies the
place assigned it here, and as this position of the chapter on
Buddhism
agrees better with recent investigations, its detachment from
the place which it previously occupied and mention here will
appear sufficiently justified. — ED.
Compare Hegel’s “ Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der
Religion,” 2d Edition, Pt. I. p. 284.
In earlier stages of progress, the mandates of Spirit (social and
political law), are given as by a power alien to itself — as by
some compulsion of mere Nature. Gradually it sees the untruth
of this alien form of validity — recognizes these mandates as
its own, and adopts them freely as a law of liberty. It then
stands in clear opposition to its logical contrary — Nature. —
ED.
Abstractions were to take the place of analogies. The power to
connect particular conceptions as analogical, does but just fall
short of the ability to comprehend the general idea which links
them. — ED.
That is, blind obedience to moral requirements — to principle
abstracted from personal conviction or inclination, as among
the Chinese. — ED.
See Hegel’s “Vorles. über die Philos. der Religion,” II. p. 102
et seq. (2d edition.)
That is — the Objective and the Subjective Will must be
harmonized. — ED.
“Plastic,” intimating his absolute devotion to statesmanship;
the latter not being a mere mechanical addition, but diffused as
a vitalizing; and formative power through the whole man.
The same term is used below to distinguish the vitalizing
morality that pervades the dramas of Æschylus and Sophocles,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 481
from the abstract sentimentalities of Euripides. — ED.
Otfried Müller, in his “History of the Dorians,” gives too
dignified an aspect to this fact; he says that Justice was, as it
were, imprinted on their minds. But such an imprinting is
always something indefinite; laws must be written, that it may
be distinctly known what is forbidden and what is allowed.
The harsh requirements of an ungenial tyranny call forth
man’s highest powers of self-sacrifice; he learns his moral
capacity; dissatisfaction with anything short of perfection
ensues — consciousness of sin; and this sentiment in its
greatest intensity, produces union with God. — ED.
So the English “train” from French “trainer” — to draw or
drag. — ED.
“I was alive without the law once,” etc. Rom. vii. 9.
In the Lutheran ritual, “a holy Catholic Church” is substituted
for “the Holy Catholic Church,” in the Belief.
That is: The Supreme Law of the Universe is recognized as
identical with the dictates of Conscience — becomes a “law of
liberty.” Morality — that authority which has the incontestable
right to determine men’s actions, which therefore is the only
absolutely free and unlimited power — is no longer a
compulsory enactment, but the free choice of human beings.
The good man would make Law for himself if he found none
made for him.
The influence of the Crusades and of the discovery of
America was simply reflex. No other phase of humanity was
thereby merged in Christendom.
The conception of a mystical regnum Patris, regnum Filii and
regnum Spiritûs Sancti is perfectly familiar to metaphysical
theologians. The first represents the period in which Deity is
not yet manifested — remains self-evolved. The second is that
of manifestation in an individual being, standing apart from
mankind generally — “the Son.” The third is that in which this
barrier is broken down, and an intimate mystical communion
ensues between God in Christ and the Regenerated, when God
is “all in all.” This remark may serve to prevent misconception
as to the tone of the remainder of the paragraph. The mention
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 482
of the Greek myth will appear pertinent in the view of those
who admit what seems a very reasonable explanation of it —
viz., as an adumbration of the self-involved character of the
prehistorical period.
The word “Gemüth” has no exactly corresponding term in
English. It is used further on synonymously with “Herz,” and
the openness to various emotions and impressions which it
implies, may perhaps be approximately rendered by “Heart.”
Yet it is but an awkward substitute.
Formal Will or Subjective Freedom is inclination or mere
casual liking, and is opposed to Substantial or Objective Will
— also called Objective Freedom — which denotes the
principles that form the basis of society, and that have been
spontaneously adopted by particular nations or by mankind
generally. The latter as well as the former may lay claim to
being a manifestation of Human Will. For however rigid the
restraints which those principles impose on individuals, they
are the result of no extraneous compulsion brought to bear on
the community at large, and are recognized as rightfully
authoritative even by the individuals whose physical comfort
or relative affections they most painfully contravene.
Unquestioning homage to unreasonable despotism, and the
severe rubrics of religious penance, can be traced to no natural
necessity or stimulus ab extra. The principles in which these
originate, may rather be called the settled and supreme
determination of the community that recognizes them. The
term “Objective Will” seems therefore not unfitly used to
describe the psychological phenomena in question. The term
“Substantial Will” (as opposed to “Formal Will”), denoting
the same phenomena, needs no defence or explanation. The
third term, “Objective Freedom,” used synonymously with the
two preceding, is justified on the ground of the unlimited
dominion exercised by such principles as those mentioned
above. “Deus solus liber.”
An incapacity for conspiracy has been remarked as a
characteristic feature of the Teutonic portion of the inhabitants
of the British Isles, as compared with their Celtic countrymen.
If such a difference can be substantiated, we seem to have an
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 483
important illustration and confirmation of Hegel’s view. —
ED.
Pure Self — pure subjectivity or personality — not only
excludes all that is manifestly objective, all that is evidently
Not-Self, but also abstracts from any peculiar conditions that
may temporarily adhere to it, e.g., youth or age, riches or
poverty, a present or a future state. Thus though it seems,
prima facie, a fixed point or atom, it is absolutely unlimited.
By loss or degradation of bodily and mental faculties, it is
possible to conceive one’s self degraded to a position which it
would be impossible to distinguish from that which we
attribute to the brutes, or by increase and improvement of
those faculties, indefinitely elevated in the scale of being,
while yet self — personal identity — is retained. On the other
hand, Absolute Being in the Christian concrete view, is an
Infinite Self. The Absolutely Limited is thus shown to be
identical with the Absolutely Unlimited.
All human actions, projects, institutions, etc., begin to be
brought to the bar of “principle” — the sanctum of subjectivity
— for absolute decision on their merits, instead of being
referred to an extraneous authority.
The term “Cathari” (). Purists, was one of the most
general designations of the dissident sects in question. The
German word “Ketzer” = heretic is by some derived from it.
That is, not a personal aim, whose self-seeking character is its
condemnation, but a general and liberal, consequently a moral
aim.
The Church, in its devotion to mere ceremonial observances,
supposes itself to be engaged with the Spiritual, while it is
really occupied with the Sensuous. The World towards the
close of the Mediaeval period, is equally devoted to the
Sensuous, but labors under no such hallucination as to the
character of its activity; and it has ceased to feel compunction
at the merely secular nature of its aims and actions, such as it
might have felt (e.g.) in the eleventh century.
The community of principle which really links together
individuals of the same class, and in virtue of which they are
similarly related to other existences, assumes a form in human
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 484
consciousness; and that form is the thought or idea Which
summarily comprehends the constituents of generic character.
The primary meaning of the word  and of the related terms
, and species, is “form.” Every “Universal” in Thought
has a corresponding generic principle in Reality, to which it
gives intellectual expression or form.
The acknowledgment of an external power authorized to
command the entire soul of man was not supplanted in their
case by a deference to Conscience and subjective Principle
(i.e., the union of Objective and Subjective freedom) as the
supreme authority.
That is, the harmony in question simply exists; its
development and results have not yet manifested themselves.
There is no current term in English denoting that great
intellectual movement which dates from the first quarter of the
eighteenth century, and which, if not the chief cause, was
certainly the guiding genius of the French Revolution. The
word “Illuminati” (signifying the members of an imaginary
confederacy for propagating the open secret of the day), might
suggest “Illumination,” as an equivalent for the German
“Aufklärung”; but the French “Éclaircissement” conveys a
more specific idea. — J. S.
Abstractions (pure thoughts), are, vi termini, detached from
the material objects which suggested them, and are at least as
evidential the product of the thinking mind as of the external
world. Hence they are ridiculed by the unintelligent as mere
fancies. In proportion as such abstractions involve activity and
intensity of thought, the mind may be said to be occupied with
itself in contemplating them. — J. S.
The sensational conclusions of the “materialistic” school of
the 18th century are reached by the “axiom of Contradiction
and Identity,” as applied in this simple dilemma: “In cognition,
Man is either active or passive; he is not active (unless he is
grossly deceiving himself), therefore he is passive; therefore
all knowledge is derived ab extra. What this external objective
being is of which this knowledge is the cognition, remains an
eternal mystery — i.e., as Hegel says: “The results of thought
are posited as finite.” — J. S.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 485
“Freedom of the Will,” in Hegel’s use of the term, has an
intensive signification, and must be distinguished from
“Liberty of Will” in its ordinary acceptation. The latter
denotes a mere liability to be affected by extrinsic motives: the
former is that absolute strength of Will which enables it to
defy all seductions that challenge its persistency. Its sole
object is self-assertion. In fact it is Individuality maintaining
itself against all dividing or distracting forces. And to maintain
individuality is to preserve consistency — to “act on principle”
— phrases with which Language, the faithful conservator of
metaphysical genealogies, connects virtuous associations. In
adopting a code of Duties, and in acknowledging Rights, the
Will recognises its own Freedom in this intensive sense, for in
such adoption it declares its own ability to pursue a certain
course of action in spite of all inducements, sensuous or
emotional, to deviate from it. These remarks may supply some
indications of the process referred to in the text. — T. S.
“Formal Freedom” is mere liberty to do what one likes. It is
called “formal,” because, as already indicated, the matter of
volition — what it is that is willed — is left entirely
undetermined. In the next paragraph the writer goes on to
show that some definite object was associated with a sentiment
otherwise unmeaning or bestial, “Vive la Liberté!” — J. S.
The radical correspondence of “Gieichheit” and
“Vergleichung” is attempted to be rendered in English by the
terms parity and comparison, and perhaps etymology may
justify the expedient. The meaning of the derivative
“comparatio” seems to point to the connection of its root
“paro” with “par.” — J. S.
That is, the will of the individual goes along with the
requirements of reasonable Laws. — J. S.position just mentioned made the basis of political theories;
Right in Society is that which the Law wills, and the Will in
question appears as an isolated individual will; thus the State, as
an aggregate of many individuals, is not an independently
substantial Unity, and the truth and essence of Right in and for
itself — to which the will of its individual members ought to be
conformed in order to be true, free Will; but the volitional atoms
[the individual wills of the members of the State] are made the
starting point, and each will is represented as absolute.
An intellectual principle was thus discovered to serve as a
basis for the State — one which does not, like previous
principles, belong to the sphere of opinion, such as the social
impulse, the desire of security for property, etc., nor owe its
origin to the religious sentiment, as does that of the Divine
appointment of the governing power — but the principle of
Certainty, which is identity with my self-consciousness, stopping
short however of that of Truth, which needs to be distinguished
from it. This is a vast discovery in regard to the profoundest
depths of being and Freedom. The consciousness of the Spiritual
is now the essential basis of the political fabric, and Philosophy
has thereby become dominant. It has been said, that the French
Revolution resulted from Philosophy, and it is not without reason
that Philosophy has been called “Weltweisheit” [World
Wisdom;] for it is not only Truth in and for itself, as the pure
essence of things, but also Truth in its living form as exhibited in
the affairs of the world. We should not, therefore, contradict the
assertion that the Revolution received its first impulse from
Philosophy. But this philosophy is in the first instance only
abstract Thought, not the concrete comprehension of absolute
Truth — intellectual positions between which there is an
immeasurable chasm.
The principle of the Freedom of the Will, therefore, asserted
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 466
itself against existing Right. Before the French Revolution, it
must be allowed, the power of the grandees had been diminished
by Richelieu, and they had been deprived of privileges; but, like
the clergy, they retained all the prerogatives which gave them an
advantage over the lower class. The political condition of France
at that time presents nothing but a confused mass of privileges
altogether contravening Thought and Reason — an utterly
irrational state of things, and one with which the greatest
corruption of morals, of Spirit was associated — an empire
characterized by Destitution of Right, and which, when its real
state begins to be recognized, becomes shameless destitution of
Right. The fearfully heavy burdens that pressed upon the people,
the embarrassment of the government to procure for the Court
the means of supporting luxury and extravagance, gave the first
impulse to discontent. The new Spirit began to agitate men’s
minds: oppression drove men to investigation. It was perceived
that the sums extorted from the people were not expended in
furthering the objects of the State, but were lavished in the most
unreasonable fashion. The entire political system appeared one
mass of injustice. The change was necessarily violent, because
the work of transformation was not undertaken by the
government. And the reason why the government did not
undertake it was that the Court, the Clergy, the Nobility, the
Parliaments themselves, were unwilling to surrender the
privileges they possessed, either for the sake of expediency or
claims. Frederick II may be mentioned as the ruler who
inaugurated the new epoch in the sphere of practical life — that
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 461
epoch in which practical political interest attains Universality [is
recognized as an abstract principle], and receives an absolute
sanction. Frederick II merits especial notive as having
comprehended the general object of the State, and as having been
the first sovereign who kept the general interest of the State
steadily in view, ceasing to pay any respect to particular interests
when they stood in the way of the common weal. His immortal
work is a domestic code — the Prussian municipal law. How the
head of a household energetically provides and governs with a
view to the weal of that household and of his dependents — of
this he has. given a unique specimen.
These general conceptions, deduced from actual and present
consciousness — the Laws of Nature and the substance of what
is right and good, have received the name of Reason. The
recognition of the validity of these laws was designated by the
term Éclaircissement (Aufklärung). From France it passed over
into Germany, and created a new world of ideas. The absolute
criterion — taking the place of all authority based on religious
belief and positive laws of Right (especially political Right) —
is the verdict passed by Spirit itself on the character of that which
is to be believed or obeyed. After a free investigation in open
day, Luther had secured to mankind Spiritual Freedom and the
Reconciliation [of the Objective and Subjective] in the concrete:
he triumphantly established the position that man’s eternal
destiny [his spiritual and moral position] must be wrought out in
himself [cannot be an opus operatum, a work performed for him].
But the import of that which is to take place in him — what truth
is to become vital in him, was taken for granted by Luther as
something already given, something revealed by religion. Now,
the principle was set up that this import must be capable of actual
investigation — something of which I [in this modern time] can
gain an inward conviction — and that to this basis of inward
demonstration every dogma must be referred.
This principle of thought makes its appearance in the first
instance in a general and abstract form; and is based on the
axiom of Contradiction and Identity.41 The results of thought are
thus posited as finite, and the eclaircissement utterly banished
and extirpated all that was speculative from things human and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 462
divine. Although it is of incalculable importance that the
multiform complex of things should be reduced to its simplest
conditions, and brought into the form of Universality, yet this
still abstract principle does not satisfy the living Spirit, the
concrete human soul.
This formally absolute principle brings us to the last stage in
History, our world, our own time.
Secular life is the positive and definite embodiment of the
Spiritual Kingdom — the Kingdom of the Will manifesting itself
in outward existence. Mere impulses are also forms in which the
inner life realizes itself; but these are transient and disconnected;
they are the ever-changing applications of volition. But that
