 is by no means to be regarded as identical with the
Greek, merely because Herodotus and the Greeks form to
themselves an idea of the Egyptian divinities under the names
“Latona,” “Pallas,” etc., so neither must the Roman be
confounded with the Greek. We have said that in the Greek
religion the thrill of awe suggested by Nature was fully
developed to something Spiritual — to a free conception, a
spiritual form of fancy — that the Greek Spirit did not remain in
the condition of inward fear, but proceeded to make the relation
borne to man by Nature, a relation of freedom and cheerfulness.
The Romans, on the contrary, remained satisfied with a dull,
stupid subjectivity; consequently, the external was only an
Object — something alien, something hidden. The Roman spirit
which thus remained involved in subjectivity, came into a
relation of constraint and dependence, to which the origin of the
word “re-ligio” (lig-are) points. The Roman had always to do
with something secret; in everything he believed in and sought
for something concealed; and while in the Greek religion
everything is open and clear, present to sense and contemplation
— not pertaining to a future world, but something friendly, and
of this world — among the Romans everything exhibits itself as
mysterious, duplicate: they saw in the object first itself, and then
that which lies concealed in it: their history is pervaded by this
duplicate mode of viewing phenomena. The city of Rome had
besides its proper name another secret one, known only to a few.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 309
It is believed by some to have been “Valentia,” the Latin
translation of “Roma”; others think it was “Amor” (“Roma” read
backwards). Romulus, the founder of the State, had also another,
a sacred name — “Quirinus” — by which title he was
worshipped: the Romans too were also called Quirites. (This
name is connected with the term “curia”: in tracing its etymology
the name of the Sabine town “Cures,” has been had recourse to.)
Among the Romans the religious thrill of awe remained
undeveloped; it was shut up to the mere subjective certainty of
its own existence. Consciousness has therefore given itself no
spiritual objectivity — has not elevated itself to the theoretical
contemplation of the eternally divine nature, and to freedom in
that contemplation; it has gained no religious substantiality for
itself from Spirit. The bare subjectivity of conscience is
characteristic of the Roman in all that he does and undertakes —
in his covenants, political relations, obligations, family relations,
etc.; and all these relations receive thereby not merely a legal
sanction, but as it were a solemnity analogous to that of an oath.
The infinite number of ceremonies at the comitia, on assuming
offices, etc., are expressions and declarations that concern this
firm bond. Everywhere the sacra play a very important part.
Transactions, naturally the most alien to constraint, became a
sacrum, and were petrified, as it were, into that. To this category
belongs, e.g., in strict marriages, the confarreatio, and the
auguries and auspices generally. The knowledge of these sacra
is utterly uninteresting and wearisome, affording fresh material
for learned research as to whether they are of Etruscan, Sabine,
or other origin. On their account the Roman people have been
regarded as extremely pious, both in positive and negative
observances; though it is ridiculous to hear recent writers speak
with unction and respect of these sacra. The Patricians were
especially fond of them; they have therefore been elevated in the
judgment of some, to the dignity of sacerdotal families, and
regarded as the sacred gentes — the possessors and conservators
of Roman religion: the plebeians then become the godless
element. On this head what is pertinent has already been said.
The ancient kings were at the same time also reges sacrorum.
After the royal dignity had been done away with, there still
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 310
remained a Rex Sacrorum; but he, like all the other priests, was
subject to the Pontifex Maximus, who presided over all the
“sacra,” and gave them such a rigidity and fixity as enabled the
patricians to maintain their religious power so long.
But the essential point in pious feeling is the subject matter
with which it occupies itself — though it is often asserted, on the
contrary, in modern times, that if pious feelings exist, it is a
matter of indifference what object occupies them. It has been
already remarked of the Romans, that their religious subjectivity
did not expand into a free spiritual and moral comprehensiveness
of being. It can be said that their piety did not develop itself into
religion; for it remained essentially formal, and this formalism
took its real side from another quarter. From the very definition
given, it follows that it can only be of a finite, unhallowed order,
since it arose outside the secret sanctum of religion. The chief
characteristic of Roman Religion is therefore a hard and dry
contemplation of certain voluntary aims, which they regard as
existing absolutely in their divinities, and whose accomplishment
they desire of them as embodying absolute power, These
purposes constitute that for the sake of which they worship the
gods, and by which, in a constrained, limited way, they are
bound to their deities. The Roman religion is therefore the
entirely prosaic one of narrow aspirations, expediency, profit.
The divinities peculiar to them are entirely prosaic; they are
conditions [of mind or body], sensations, or useful arts, to which
their dry fancy, having elevated them to independent power, gave
objectivity; they are partly abstractions, which could only
become frigid allegories — partly conditions of being which
appear as bringing advantage or injury, and which were
presented as objects of worship in their original bare and limited
form. We can but briefly notice a few examples. The Romans
worshipped “Pax,” “Tranquillitas,” “Vacuna” (Repose),
“Angeronia” (Sorrow and Grief), as divinities; they consecrated
altars to the Plague, to Hunger, to Mildew (Robigo), to Fever,
and to the Dea Cloacina. Juno appears among the Romans not
merely as “Lucina,” the obstetric goddess, but also as “Juno
Ossipagina,” the divinity who forms the bones of the child, and
as “Juno Unxia,” who anoints the hinges of the doors at
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 311
marriages (a matter which was also reckoned among the
“sacra”). How little have these prosaic conceptions in common
with the beauty of the spiritual powers and deities of the Greeks!
On the other hand, Jupiter as “Jupiter Capitolinus” represents the
generic essence of the Roman Empire, which is also personified
in the divinities “Roma” and “Fortuna Publica.”
It was the Romans especially who introduced the practice of
not merely supplicating the gods in time of need, and celebrating
“lectisternia,” but of also making solemn promises and vows to
them. For help in difficulty they sent even into foreign countries,
and imported foreign divinities and rites. The introduction of the
gods and most of the Roman temples thus arose from necessity
— from a vow of some kind, and an obligatory, not disinterested
acknowledgment of favors. The Greeks on the contrary erected
and instituted their beautiful temples, and statues, and rites, from
love to beauty and divinity for their own sake.
Only one side of the Roman religion exhibits something
attractive, and that is the festivals, which bear a relation to
country life, and whose observance was transmitted from the
earliest times. The idea of the Saturnian time is partly their basis
— the conception of a state of things antecedent to and beyond
the limits of civil society and political combination; but their
import is partly taken from Nature generally — the Sun, the
course of the year, the seasons, months, etc., (with astronomical
intimations) — partly from the particular aspects of the course of
Nature, as bearing upon pastoral and agricultural life. There were
festivals of sowing and harvesting and of the seasons; the
principal was that of the Saturnalia, etc. In this aspect there
appears much that is naive and ingenuous in the tradition. Yet
this series of rites, on the whole, presents a very limited and
prosaic appearance; deeper views of the great powers of nature
and their generic processes are not deducible from them; for they
are entirely directed to external vulgar advantage, and the
merriment they occasioned, degenerated into a buffoonery
unrelieved by intellect. While among the Greeks their tragic art
developed itself from similar rudiments, it is on the other hand
remarkable that among the Romans the scurrilous dances and
songs connected with the rural festivals were kept up till the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 312
latest periods without any advance from this naive but rude form
to anything really artistic.
It has already been said that the Romans adopted the Greek
Gods, (the mythology of the Roman poets is entirely derived
from the Greeks); but the worship of these beautiful gods of the
imagination appears to have been among them of a very cold and
superficial order. Their talk of Jupiter, Juno, Minerva sounds like
a mere theatrical mention of them. The Greeks made their
Pantheon the embodiment of a rich intellectual material, and
adorned it with bright fancies; it was to them an object calling
forth continual invention and exciting thoughtful reflection; and
an extensive, nay inexhaustible, treasure has thus been created
for sentiment, feeling and thought in their mythology. The Spirit
of the Romans did not indulge and delight itself in that play of a
thoughtful fancy; the Greek mythology appears lifeless and
exotic in their hands. Among the Roman poets — especially
Virgil — the introduction of the gods is the product of a frigid
Understanding and of imitation. The gods are used in these
poems as machinery, and in a merely superficial way; regarded
much in the same way as in our didactic treatises on the belleslettres,
where among other directions we find one relating to the
use of such/machinery in epics — in order to produce
astonishment.
The Romans were as essentially different from the Greeks in
respect to their public games. In these the Romans were, properly
speaking, only spectators. The mimetic and theatrical
representation, the dancing, foot-racing and wrestling, they left
to manumitted slaves, gladiators, or criminals condemned to
death. Nero’s deepest degradation was his appearing on a public
stage as a singer, lyrist and combatant. As the Romans were only
spectators, these diversions were something foreign to them; they
did not enter into them with their whole souls. With increasing
luxury the taste for the baiting of beasts and men became
particularly keen. Hundreds of bears, lions, tigers, elephants,
crocodiles, and ostriches, were produced, and slaughtered for
mere amusement. A body consisting of hundreds, nay thousands
of gladiators, when entering the amphitheatre at a certain festival
to engage in a sham sea-fight, addressed the Emperor with the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 313
words: “Those who are devoted to death salute thee,” to excite
some compassion. In vain! the whole were devoted to mutual
slaughter. In place of human sufferings in the depths of the soul
and spirit, occasioned by the contradictions of life, and which
find their solution in Destiny, the Romans instituted a cruel
reality of corporeal sufferings: blood in streams, the rattle in the
throat which signals death, and the expiring gasp were the scenes
that delighted them. — This cold negativity of naked murder
exhibits at the same time that murder of all spiritual objective
aim which had taken place in the soul. I need only mention, in
addition, the auguries, auspices, and Sibylline books, to remind
you how fettered the Romans were by superstitions of all kinds,
and how they pursued exclusively their own aims in all the
observances in question. The entrails of beasts, flashes of
lightning, the flight of birds, the Sibylline dicta determined the
administration and projects of the State. All this was in the hands
of the patricians, who consciously made use of it as a mere
outward [non-spiritual, secular] means of constraint to further
their own ends and oppress the people.
The distinct elements of Roman religion are, according to what
has been said, subjective religiosity and a ritualism having for its
object purely superficial external aims. Secular aims are left
entirely free, instead of being limited by religion — in fact they
are rather justified by it. The Romans are invariably pious,
whatever may be the substantial character of their actions. But as
the sacred principle here is nothing but an empty form, it is
exactly of such a kind that it can be an instrument in the power
of the devotee; it is taken possession of by the individual, who
seeks his private objects and interests; whereas the truly Divine
possesses on the contrary a concrete power in itself. But where
there is only a powerless form, the individual — the Will,
possessing an independent concreteness able to make that form
its own, and render it subservient to its views — stands above it.
This happened in Rome on the part of the patricians. The
possession of sovereignty by the patricians is thereby made firm,
sacred, incommunicable, peculiar: the administration of
government, and political privileges, receive the character of
hallowed private property. There does not exist therefore a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 314
substantial national unity — not that beautiful and moral
necessity of united life in the Polis; but every “gens” is itself
firm, stern, having its own Penates and sacra; each has it own
political character, which it always preserves: strict, aristocratic
severity distinguished the Claudii; benevolence towards the
people, the Valerii; nobleness of spirit, the Cornelii. Separation
and limitation were extended even to marriage, for the connubia
of patricians with plebeians were deemed profane. But in that
very subjectivity of religion we find also the principle of
arbitrariness: and while on the one hand we have arbitrary choice
invoking religion to bolster up private possession, we have on
the other hand the revolt of arbitrary choice against religion. For
the same order of things can, on the one side, be regarded as
privileged by its religious form, and on the other side wear the
aspect of being merely a matter of choice — of arbitrary volition
on the part of man. When the time was come for it to be
degraded to the rank of a mere form, it was necessarily known
and treated as a form — trodden under foot — represented as
formalism. — The inequality which enters into the domain of
sacred things forms the transition from religion to the bare reality
of political life. The consecrated inequality of will and of private
property constitutes the fundamental condition of the change.
The Roman principle admits of aristocracy alone as the
constitution proper to it, but which directly manifests itself only
in an antithetical form — internal inequality. Only from
necessity and the pressure of adverse circumstances is this
contradiction momentarily smoothed over; for it involves a
duplicate power, the sternness and malevolent isolation of whose
components can only be mastered and bound together by a still
greater sternness, into a unity maintained by force.
Chapter II. — The History of Rome to the Second Punic
War
In the first period, several successive stages display their
characteristic varieties. The Roman State here exhibits its first
phase of growth, under Kings; then it receives a republican
constitution, at whose head stand Consuls. The struggle between
patricians and plebeians begins; and after this has been set at rest
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 315
by the concession of the plebeian demands, there ensues a state
of contentment in the internal affairs of Rome, and it acquires
strength to combat victoriously with the nation that preceded it
on the stage of general history. As regards the accounts of the
first Roman kings, every datum has met with flat contradiction
as the result of criticism; but it is going too far to deny them all
credibility. Seven kings in all, are mentioned by tradition; and
even the “Higher Criticism” is obliged to recognize the last links
in the series as perfectly historical. Romulus is called the founder
of this union of freebooters; he organized it into a military state.
Although the traditions respecting him appear fabulous, they
only contain what is in accordance with the Roman Spirit as
above described. To the second king, Numa, is ascribed the
introduction of the religious ceremonies. This trait is very
remarkable from its implying that religion was introduced later
than political union, while among other peoples religious
traditions make their appearance in the remotest periods and
before all civil institutions. The king was at the same time a
priest (rex is referred by etymologists to  — to sacrifice. As
is the case with states generally, the Political was at first united
with the Sacerdotal, and a theocratical state of things prevailed.
The King stood here at the head of those who enjoyed privileges
in virtue of the sacra.
The separation of the distinguished and powerful citizens as
senators and patricians took place as early as the first kings.
Romulus is said to have appointed 100 patres, respecting which
however the Higher Criticism is sceptical. In religion, arbitrary
ceremonies — the sacra — became fixed marks of distinction,
and peculiarities of the gentes and orders. The internal
organization of the State was gradually realized. Livy says that
as Numa established all divine matters, so Servius Tullius
introduced the different Classes, and the Census, according to
which the share of each citizen in the administration of public
affairs was determined. The patricians were discontented with
this scheme, especially because Servius Tullius abolished a part
of the debts owed by the plebeians, and gave public lands to the
poorer citizens, which made them possessors of landed property.
He divided the people into six classes, of which the first together
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 316
with the knights formed ninety-eight centuries, the inferior
classes proportionately fewer. Thus, as they voted by centuries,
the class first in rank had also the greatest weight in the State. It
appears that previously the patricians had the power exclusively
in their hands, but that after Servius’s division they had merely
a preponderance; which explains their discontent with his
institutions. With Servius the history becomes more distinct; and
under him and his predecessor, the elder Tarquinius, traces of
prosperity are exhibited. Niebuhr is surprised that according to
Dionysius and Livy, the most ancient constitution was
democratic, inasmuch as the vote of every citizen had equal
weight in the assembly of the people. But Livy only says that
Servius abolished the suffragium viritim. Now in the comitia
curiata — the cliental relation, which absorbed the plebs,
extending to all — the patricians alone had a vote, and populus
denoted at that time only the patricians. Dionysius therefore does
not contradict himself, when he says that the constitution
according to the laws of Romulus was strictly aristocratic.
Almost all the Kings were foreigners — a circumstance very
characteristic of the origin of Rome. Numa, who succeeded the
founder of Rome, was according to the tradition, one of the
Sabines — a people which under the reign of Romulus, led by
Tatius, is said to have settled on one of the Roman hills. At a
later date however the Sabine country appears as a region
entirely separated from the Roman State. Numa was followed by
Tullus Hostilius, and the very name of this king points to his
foreign origin. Ancus Martius, the fourth king, was the grandson
of Numa. Tarquinius Priscus sprang from a Corinthian family,
as we had occasion to observe above. Servius Tullius was from
Corniculum, a conquered Latin town; Tarquinius Superbus was
descended from the elder Tarquinius. Under this last king Rome
reached a high degree of prosperity: even at so early a period as
this, a commercial treaty is said to have been concluded with the
Carthaginians; and to be disposed to reject this as mythical
would imply forgetfulness of the connection which Rome had,
even at that time, with the Etrurians and other bordering peoples
whose prosperity depended on trade and maritime pursuits. The
Romans were probably even then acquainted with the art of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 317
writing, and already possessed that clearsighted comprehension
which was their remarkable characteristic, and which led to that
perspicuous historical composition for which they are famous.
In the growth of the inner life of the state, the power of the
Patricians had been much reduced; and the kings often courted
the support of the people — as we see was frequently the case in
the mediaeval history of Europe — in order to steal a march
upon the Patricians. We have already observed this in Servius
Tullius. The last king, Tarquinius Superbus, consulted the senate
but little in state affairs; he also neglected to supply the place of
its deceased members, and acted in every respect as if he aimed
at its utter dissolution. Then ensued a state of political
excitement which only needed an occasion to break out into open
revolt. An insult to the honor of a matron — the invasion of that
sanctum sanctorum — by the son of the king, supplied such an
occasion. The kings were banished in the year 244 of the City
and 510 of the Christian Era (that is, if the building of Rome is
to be dated 753 B.C.) and the royal dignity abolished forever.
The Kings were expelled by the patricians, not by the plebeians
; if therefore the patricians are to be regarded as possessed of
“divine right” as being a sacred race, it is worthy of note that we
find them here contravening such legitimation; for the King was
their High Priest. We observe on this occasion with what dignity
the sanctity of marriage was invested in the eyes of the Romans.
The principle of subjectivity and piety (pudor) was with them the
religious and guarded element; and its violation becomes the
occasion of the expulsion of the Kings, and later on of the
Decemvirs too. We find monogamy therefore also looked upon
by the Romans as an understood thing. It was not introduced by
an express law; we have nothing but an incidental testimony in
the Institutes, where it is said that marriages under certain
conditions of relationship are not allowable, because a man may
not have two wives. It is not until the reign of Diocletian that we
find a law expressly determining that no one belonging to the
Roman empire may have two wives, “since according to a
pretorian edict also, infamy attaches to such a condition” (cum
etiam in edicto praetoris hujusmodi viri infamia notati sunt).
Monogamy therefore is regarded as naturally valid, and is based
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 318
on the principle of subjectivity. — Lastly, we must also observe
that royalty was not abrogated here as in Greece by suicidal
destruction on the part of the royal races, but was exterminated
in hate. The King, himself the chief priest, had been guilty of the
grossest profanation; the principle of subjectivity revolted against
the deed, and the patricians, thereby elevated to a sense of
independence, threw off the yoke of royalty. Possessed by the
same feeling, the plebs at a later date rose against the patricians,
and the Latins and the Allies against the Romans; until the
equality of the social units was restored through the whole
Roman dominion (a multitude of slaves, too, being emancipated)
and they were held together by simple Despotism.
Livy remarks that Brutus hit upon the right epoch for the
expulsion of the kings, for that if it had taken place earlier, the
state would have suffered dissolution. What would have
happened, he asks, if this homeless crowd had been liberated
earlier, when living together had not yet produced a mutual
conciliation of dispositions? — The constitution now became in
name republican. If we look at the matter more closely it is
evident (Livy ii. 1) that no other essential change took place than
the transference of the power which was previously permanent
in the King, to two annual Consuls. These two, equal in power,
managed military and judicial as well as administrative business;
for praetors, as supreme judges, do not appear till a later date.
At first all authority remained in the hands of the consuls; and
at the beginning of the republic, externally and internally, the
state was in evil plight. In the Roman history a period occurs as
troubled as that in the Greek which followed the extinction of the
dynasties. The Romans had first to sustain a severe conflict with
their expelled King, who had sought and found help from the
Etrurians. In the war against Porsena the Romans lost all their
conquests, and even their independence : they were compelled to
lay down their arms and to give hostages; according to an
expression of Tacitus (Hist. 3, 72) it seems as if Porsena had
even taken Rome. Soon after the expulsion of the Kings we have
the contest between the patricians and plebeians; for the abolition
of royalty had taken place exclusively to the advantage of the
aristocracy, to which the royal power was transferred, while the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 319
plebs lost the protection which the Kings had afforded it. All
magisterial and juridical power, and all property in land was at
this time in the hands of the patricians; while the people,
continually dragged out to war, could not employ themselves in
peaceful occupations: handicrafts could not flourish, and the only
acquisition the plebeians could make was their share in the
booty. The patricians had their territory and soil cultivated by
slaves, and assigned some of their land to their clients, who on
condition of paying taxes and contributions — as tenant
cultivators, therefore — had the usufruct of it. This relation, on
account of the form in which the dues were paid by the Clientes,
was very similar to vassalage: they were obliged to give
contributions towards the marriage of the daughters of the
Patronus, to ransom him or his sons when in captivity, to assist
them in obtaining magisterial offices, and to make up the losses
sustained in suits at law. The administration of justice was
likewise in the hands of the patricians, and that without the
limitations of definite and written laws; a desideratum which at
a later period the Decemvirs were created to supply. All the
power of government belonged moreover to the patricians, for
they were in possession of all offices — first of the consulship,
afterwards of the military tribuneship and censorship (instituted
A.U.C. 311) — by which the actual administration of government
as likewise the oversight of it, was left to them alone. Lastly, it
was the patricians who constituted the Senate. The question as to
how that body was recruited appears very important. But in this
matter no systematic plan was followed. Romulus is said to have
founded the senate, consisting then of one hundred members; the
succeeding kings increased this number, and Tarquinius Priscus
fixed it at three hundred. Junius Brutus restored the senate, which
had very much fallen away, de novo. In after times it would
appear that the censors and sometimes the dictators filled up the
vacant places in the senate. In the second Punic War, A.U.C. 538,
a dictator was chosen, who nominated one hundred and seventyseven
new senators: he selected those who had been invested
with curule dignities, the plebeian Ædiles, Tribunes of the People
and Quaestors, citizens who had gained spolia opima or the
corona civica. Under Caesar the number of the senators was
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 320
raised to eight hundred; Augustus reduced it to six hundred. It
has been regarded as great negligence on the part of the Roman
historians, that they give us so little information respecting the
composition and redintegration of the senate. But this point
which appears to us to be invested with infinite importance, was
not of so much moment to the Romans at large; they did not
attach so much weight to formal arrangements, for their principal
concern was, how the government was conducted. How in fact
can we suppose the constitutional rights of the ancient Romans
to have been so well defined, and that at a time which is even
regarded as mythical, and its traditionary history as epical?
The people were in some such oppressed condition as, e.g. the
Irish were a few years ago in the British Isles, while they
remained at the same time entirely excluded from the
government. Often they revolted and made a secession from the
city. Sometimes they also refused military service; yet it always
remains a very striking fact that the senate could so long resist
superior numbers irritated by oppression and practised in war; for
the main struggle lasted for more than a hundred years. In the
fact that the people could so long be kept in check is manifested
its respect for legal order and the sacra. But of necessity the
plebeians at last secured their righteous demands, and their debts
were often remitted. The severity of the patricians their creditors,
the debts due to whom they had to discharge by slave-work,
drove the plebs to revolts. At first it demanded and received only
what it had already enjoyed under the kings — landed property
and protection against the powerful. It received assignments of
land, and Tribunes of the People — functionaries that is to say,
who had the power to put a veto on every decree of the senate.
When this office commenced, the number of tribunes was limited
to two: later there were ten of them; which however was rather
injurious to the plebs, since all that the senate had to do was to
gain over one of the tribunes, in order to thwart the purpose of all
the rest by his single opposition. The plebs obtained at the same
time the provocatio ad populum: that is, in every case of
magisterial oppression, the condemned person might appeal to
the decision of the people — a privilege of infinite importance to
the plebs, and which especially irritated the patricians. At the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 321
repeated desire of the people the Decemviri were nominated —
the Tribunate of the People being suspended — to supply the
desideratum of a determinate legislation; they perverted, as is
well known, their unlimited power to tyranny; and were driven
from power on an occasion entailing similar disgrace to that
which led to the punishment of the Kings. The dependence of the
clientela was in the meantime weakened; after the decemviral
epoch the clientes are less and less prominent and are merged in
the plebs, which adopts resolutions (plebiscita); the senate by
itself could only issue senatus consulta, and the tribunes, as well
as the senate, could now impede the comitia and elections. By
degrees the plebeians effected their admissibility to all dignities
and offices; but at first a plebeian consul, aedile, censor, etc., was
not equal to the patrician one, on account of the sacra which the
latter kept in his hands; and a long time intervened after this
concession before a plebeian actually became a consul. It was the
tribunus plebis, Licinius, who established the whole cycle of
these political arrangements — in the second half of the fourth
century, A.U.C. 387. It was he also who chiefly commenced the
agitation for the lex agraria, respecting which so much has been
written and debated among the learned of the day. The agitators
for this law excited during every period very great commotions
in Rome. The plebeians were practically excluded from almost
all the landed property, and the object of the Agrarian Laws was
to provide lands for them — partly in the neighborhood of Rome,
partly in the conquered districts, to which colonies were to be
then led out. In the time of the Republic we frequently see
military leaders assigning lands to the people; but in every case
they were accused of striving after royalty, because it was the
kings who had exalted the plebs. The Agrarian Law required that
no citizen should possess more than five hundred jugera: the
patricians were consequently obliged to surrender a large part of
their property. Niebuhr in particular has undertaken extensive
researches respecting the agrarian laws, and has conceived
himself to have made great and important discoveries: he says,
viz. that an infringement of the sacred right of property was never
thought of, but that the state had only assigned a portion of the
public lands for the use of the plebs, having always had the right
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 322
of disposing of them as its own property. I only remark in
passing that Hegewisch had made this discovery before Niebuhr,
and that Niebuhr derived the particular data on which his
assertion rests from Appian and Plutarch; that is from Greek
authors, respecting whom he himself allows that we should have
recourse to them only in an extreme case. How often does Livy,
as well as Cicero and others, speak of the Agrarian laws, while
nothing definite can be inferred from their statements! — This is
another proof of the inaccuracy of the Roman historians. The
whole affair ends in nothing but a useless question of
jurisprudence. The land which the patricians had taken into
possession or in which colonies settled, was originally public
land; but it also certainly belonged to those in possession, and
our information is not at all promoted by the assertion that it
always remained public land. This discovery of Niebuhr’s turns
upon a very immaterial distinction, existing perhaps in his ideas,
but not in reality. — The Licinian law was indeed carried, but
soon transgressed and utterly disregarded. Licinius Stolo himself,
who had first “agitated” for the law, was punished because he
possessed a larger property in land than was allowed, and the
patricians opposed the execution of the law with the greatest
obstinacy. We must here call especial attention to the distinction
which exists between the Roman, the Greek, and our own
circumstances. Our civil society rests on other principles, and in
it such measures are not necessary. Spartans and Athenians, who
had not arrived at such an abstract idea of the State as was so
tenaciously held by the Romans, did not trouble themselves with
abstract rights, but simply desired that the citizens should have
the means of subsistence; and they required of the state that it
should take care that such should be the case. This is the chief
point in the first period of Roman History — that the plebs
attained the right of being eligible to the higher political offices,
and that by a share which they too managed to obtain in the land
and soil, the means of subsistence were assured to the citizens.
By this union of the patriciate and the plebs, Rome first attained
true internal consistency ; and only after this had been realized
could the Roman power develop itself externally. A period of
satisfied absorption in the common interest ensues, and the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 323
citizens are weary of internal struggles. When after civil discords
nations direct their energies outward, they appear in their greatest
strength; for the previous excitement continues, and no longer
having its object within, seeks for it without. This direction given
to the Roman energies was able for a moment to conceal the
defect of that union; equilibrium was restored, but without an
essential centre of unity and support. The contradiction that
existed could not but break out again fearfully at a later period;
but previously to this time the greatness of Rome had to display
itself in war and the conquest of the world. The power, the
wealth, the glory derived from these wars, as also the difficulties
to which they led, kept the Romans together as regards the
internal affairs of the state. Their courage and discipline secured
their victory. As compared with the Greek or Macedonian, the
Roman art of war has special peculiarities. The strength of the
phalanx lay in its mass and in its massive character. The Roman
legions also present a close array, but they had at the same time
an articulated organization: they united the two extremes of
massiveness on the one hand, and of dispersion into light troops
on the other hand: they held firmly together, while at the same
time they were capable of ready expansion. Archers and slingers
preceded the main body of the Roman army when they attacked
the enemy — afterwards leaving the decision to the sword.
It would be a wearisome task to pursue the wars of the Romans
in Italy; partly because they are in themselves unimportant —
even the often empty rhetoric of the generals in Livy cannot very
much increase the interest — partly on account of the
unintelligent character of the Roman annalists, in whose pages
we see the Romans carrying on war only with “enemies” without
learning anything further of their individuality — e.g., the
Etruscans, the Samnites, the Ligurians, with whom they carried
on wars during many hundred years. — It is singular in regard to
these transactions that the Romans, who have the justification
dependence and exposure to secular violence. But Gregory made
still further demands on the secular power. The transference of
benefices to a new incumbent was to receive validity simply in
virtue of his ordination by his ecclesiastical superior, and the
Pope was to have exclusive control over the vast property of the
ecclesiastical community. The Church as a divinely constituted
power, laid claim to supremacy over secular authority —
founding that claim on the abstract principle that the Divine is
it there was as yet no subjectivity involving unity, but only a
subjectivity conditioned by a careless superficial self-seeking.
Thus that constitution was destitute of any firm bond; it had no
objective support in subjectivity; for in fact no constitution was
as yet possible.
This leads us to the Second Reaction — that of individuals
against the authority of law. The capacity of appreciating legal
order and the common weal is altogether absent, has no vital
existence in the peoples themselves. The duties of every free
citizen, the authority of the judge to give judicial decisions, that
of the count of a province to hold his court, and interest in the
laws as such, are no longer regarded as valid now that the strong
hand from above ceases to hold the reins of sovereignty. The
brilliant administration of Charlemagne had vanished without
leaving a trace, and the immediate consequence was the general
defencelessness of individuals. The need of protection is sure to
be felt in some degree in every well-organized state: each citizen
knows his rights and also knows that for the security of
possession the social state is absolutely necessary. Barbarians
have not yet attained this sense of need — the want of protection
from others. They look upon it as a limitation of their freedom if
their rights must be guaranteed them by others. Thus, therefore,
the impulse towards a firm organization did not exist: men must
first be placed in a defenceless condition, before they were
sensible of the necessity of the organization of a State. The
political edifice had to be reconstructed from the very
foundations. The commonwealth as then organized had no
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 387
vitality or firmness at all either in itself or in the minds of the
people; and its weakness manifested itself in the fact that it was
unable to give protection to its individual members. As observed
above, the idea of duty was not present in the Spirit of the
Germans; it had to be restored. In the first instance volition could
only be arrested in its wayward career in reference to the merely
external point of possession; and to make it feel the importance
of the protection of the State, it had to be violently dislodged
from its obtuseness and impelled by necessity to seek union and
a social condition. Individuals were therefore obliged to consult
for themselves by taking refuge with Individuals, and submitted
to the authority of certain powerful persons, who constituted a
private possession and personal sovereignty out of that authority
which formerly belonged to the Commonwealth. As officers of
the State, the counts did not meet with obedience from those
committed to their charge, and they were as little desirous of it.
Only for themselves did they covet it. They assumed to
themselves the power of the State, and made the authority with
which they had been intrusted as a beneficium, a heritable
possession. As in earlier times the King or other magnates
conferred fiefs on their vassals by way of rewards, now,
individuals. The valor that now manifested itself, was displayed
not on behalf of the State, but of private interests. In every
district arose castles; fortresses were erected, and that for the
defence of private property, and with a view to plunder the
tyranny. In the way just mentioned, the political totality was
ignored at those points where individual authority was
established, among which the seats of bishops and archbishops
deserve especial mention. The bishoprics had been freed from
the jurisdiction of the judicial tribunals, and from the operations
of the executive generally. The bishops had stewards on whom
at their request the Emperors conferred the jurisdiction which the
Counts had formerly exercised. Thus there were detached
ecclesiastical domains — ecclesiastical districts which belonged
to a saint (Germ. Weichbilder). Similar suzerainties of a secular
kind were subsequently constituted. Both occupied the position
of the previous Provinces [Gaue] or Counties [Grafschaften].
Only in a few towns where communities of freemen were
independently strong enough to secure protection and safety, did
relics of the ancient free constitution remain. With these
exceptions the free communities entirely disappeared, and
became subject to the prelates or to the Counts and Dukes,
thenceforth known as seigneurs and princes. The imperial power
was extolled in general terms, as something very great and
exalted: the Emperor passed for the secular head of entire
Christendom: but the more exalted the ideal dignity of the
emperors, the more limited was it in reality. France derived
extraordinary advantage from the fact that it entirely repudiated
this baseless assumption, while in Germany the advance of
political development was hindered by that pretence of power.
The kings and emperors were no longer chiefs of the state, but of
the princes, who were indeed their vassals, but possessed
sovereignty and territorial lordships of their own. The whole
social condition therefore, being founded on individual
sovereignty, it might be supposed that the advance to a State
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 389
would be possible only through the return of those individual
sovereignties to an official relationship. But to accomplish this,
a superior power would have been required, such as was not in
existence; for the feudal lords themselves determined how far
they were still dependent on the general constitution of the state.
No authority of Law and Right is valid any longer; nothing but
chance power — the crude caprice of particular as opposed to
universally valid Right; and this struggles against equality of
Rights and Laws. Inequality of political privileges — the
allotment being the work of the purest haphazard — is the
predominant feature. It is impossible that a Monarchy can arise
from such a social condition through the subjugation of the
several minor powers under the Chief of the State, as such.nowhere are to be found such revolutionary utterances as in the
Gospels; for everything that had been respected, is treated as a
matter of indifference — as worthy of no regard.
The next point is the development of this principle; and the
whole sequel of History is the history of its development. Its first
realization is the formation by the friends of Christ, of a Society
— a Church. It has been already remarked that only after the
death of Christ could the Spirit come upon his friends; that only
then were they able to conceive the true idea of God, viz., that in
Christ man is redeemed and reconciled: for in him the idea of
eternal truth is recognized, the essence of man acknowledged to
be Spirit, and the fact proclaimed that only by stripping himself
of his finiteness and surrendering himself to pure selfconsciousness,
does he attain the truth. Christ — man as man —
in whom the unity of God and man has appeared, has in his
death, and his history generally, himself presented the eternal
history of Spirit — a history which every man has to accomplish
in himself, in order to exist as Spirit, or to become a child of
God, a citizen of his kingdom. The followers of Christ, who
combine on this principle and live in the spiritual life as their
aim, form the Church, which is the Kingdom of God. “Where
two or three are gathered together in my name” (i.e., “in the
character of partakers in my being”) says Christ, “there am I in
the midst of them.” The Church is a real present life in the Spirit
of Christ.
It is important that the Christian religion be not limited to the
teachings of Christ himself: it is in the Apostles that the
completed and developed truth is first exhibited. This complex
of thought unfolded itself in the Christian community. That
community, in its first experiences, found itself sustaining a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 346
double relation — first, a relation to the Roman World, and
secondly, to the truth whose development was its aim. We will
pursue these different relations separately.
The Christian community found itself in the Roman world, and
in this world the extension of the Christian religion was to take
place. That community must therefore keep itself removed from
all activity in the State — constitute itself a separate company,
and not react against the decrees, views, and transactions of the
state. But as it was secluded from the state, and consequently did
not hold the Emperor for its absolute sovereign, it was the object
of persecution and hate. Then was manifested that infinite inward
liberty which it enjoyed, in the great steadfastness with which
sufferings and sorrows were patiently borne for the sake of the
highest truth. It was less the miracles of the Apostles that gave
to Christianity its outward extension and inward strength, than
the substance, the truth of the doctrine itself. Christ himself says:
“Many will say to me at that day: Lord, Lord! have we not
prophesied in thy name, have we not cast out devils in thy name,
have we not in thy name done many wonderful deeds? Then will
I profess unto them: I never knew you, depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity.”
As regards its other relation, viz., that to the Truth, it is
especially important to remark that the Dogma — the Theoretical
— was already matured within the Roman World, while we find
the development of the State from that principle, a much later
growth. The Fathers of the Church and the Councils constituted
the dogma; but a chief element in this constitution was supplied
by the previous development of philosophy. Let us examine more
closely how the philosophy of the time stood related to religion.
It has already been remarked that the Roman inwardness and
subjectivity, which presented itself only abstractly, as soulless
personality in the exclusive position assumed by the Ego, was
refined by the philosophy of Stoicism and Scepticism to the form
of Universality. The ground of Thought was thereby reached, and
God was known in Thought as the One Infinite. The Universal
stands here only as an unimportant predicate — not itself a
Subject, but requiring a concrete particular application to make
it such. But the One and Universal, the Illimitable conceived by
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 347
fancy, is essentially Oriental; for measureless conceptions,
carrying all limited existence beyond its .proper bounds, are
indigenous to the East. Presented in the domain of Thought itself,
the Oriental One is the invisible and non-sensuous God of the
Israelitish people, but whom they also make an object of
conception as a person. This principle became World-Historical
with Christianity. — In the Roman World, the union of the East
and West had taken place in the first instance by means of
conquest: it took place now inwardly, psychologically, also; —
the Spirit of the East spreading over the West. The worship of
that laymen as well as ecclesiastics of energetic character
opposed its continuance. The Emperor Henry III put an end to
the strife of factions, by nominating the Popes himself, and
supporting them by his authority in defiance of the opposition of
the Roman nobility. Pope Nicholas II decided that the Popes
should be chosen by the Cardinals; but as the latter partly
belonged to dominant families, similar contests of factions
continued to accompany their election. Gregory VII (already
famous as Cardinal Hildebrand) sought to secure the
independence of the church in this frightful condition of things,
by two measures especially. First, he enforced the celibacy of the
clergy. From the earliest times, it must be observed, the opinion
had prevailed that it was commendable and desirable for the
clergy to remain unmarried. Yet the annalists and chroniclers
inform us that this requirement was but indifferently complied
with. Nicholas II had indeed pronounced the married clergy to be
a new sect; but Gregory VII proceeded to enforce the restriction
with extraordinary energy, excommunicating all the married
clergy and all laymen who should hear mass when they
officiated. In this way the ecclesiastical body was shut up within
itself and excluded from the morality of the State. — His second
measure was directed against simony, i.e. the sale of or arbitrary
appointment to bishoprics and to the Papal See itself.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 393
Ecclesiastical offices were thenceforth to be filled by the clergy,
who were capable of administering them; an arrangement which
necessarily brought the ecclesiastical body into violent collision
with secular seigneurs.
These were the two grand measures by which Gregory
purposed to emancipate the Church from its condition of
