
Tarkan Tevetoðlu (Turkish pronunciation: [ta?'kan teve'to??u]; born 17 October 1972 (age 38)), simply known as Tarkan, is a World Music award winning Turkish pop singer. He was born in Alzey, West Germany, and raised in Turkey. Tarkan has been known for the use of sexual and romantic themes in his work and has been nicknamed the "Prince of Pop" by the media.[1] He has released several platinum-selling albums during his career, with an estimated 29 million albums and singles sold.[2] He also produces music through his company HITT Music, which he established in February 1997. One of a few European singers that has managed to span chart success over three continents without singing in English, the artist is also noted for his live stage performances. Tarkan's effect on Turkey has been compared by The Washington Post as analogous to Elvis in America circa 1957 and Atlantic Records co-founder Ahmet Ertegün described him as one of the best live performers he had ever seen.[3] He has also been listed by Rhapsody as a key artist in the history of European pop music, with his signature song "Þýmarýk" as a keystone track that moved the genre forward.[4]
Contents [hide]
1 Early life


Tarkan was born in Alzey, West Germany, to Ali and Neþe Tevetçioðlu, and was named after a popular 1960s Turkish comic book character.[5] The name is said to originate from an ancient Turkic king or title,[6] meaning bold and strong (cf. Tarkhan).[7] In 2009 it was discovered that Tarkan was in fact his middle name and his first name was Hüsamettin, which means "sword of faith".[8]. Tarkan comes from a muslim family.
His parents were part of the generation of Turkish immigrants that came to West Germany during that country's economic boom. His father's family has a decorated military past as war heroes that fought in the Ottoman armies in the Russo-Turkish Wars,[9] while his mother's family comes from a long line of talented Turkmen folk singers. Tarkan chose to cover a song in 2003 by Turkish minstrel Aþýk Veysel Þatýroðlu as a nod to his roots. In the early stages of his career he was seen sporting a necklace with the crescent and star, the symbol of the Turkish flag, making it a fashion accessory amongst the Turkish youth - as the entertainer Madonna had done globally with the crucifix.[10]
Tarkan has three older half-siblings named Adnan, Gülay and Nuray from his mother's first marriage, and a brother, Hakan, and younger sister, Handan from her marriage to his father.[11] Although Tarkan was raised in Alzey until the age of 13, his father Ali suddenly decided to move the family back to Turkey in 1986. His father died of a heart attack in 1995 at the age of 49, and was buried in his home village of Rüzgarlý Köy,[12] in the Turkish district of Ikizdere in the Rize Province situated in the Turkish Black Sea region. His mother later married an architect, Seyhun Kahraman.[13] Tarkan keeps close ties with his family in Turkey and Germany. He still understands the German language though speaks little, since he has been living in the USA and Turkey for 20 years.[14]
[edit]Career



Tarkan in Skopje, 2007


Tarkan in Istanbul, 2010
Tarkan has charted both in Europe and in the Americas with his definitive song "Þýmarýk". As a result of its widespread success and immediately recognizable sound of Tarkan kissing on the track, "Þýmarýk" was reincarnated into English as "Kiss Kiss" by Stella Soleil and later Holly Valance (which notched her a UK number one hit), after the composer Sezen Aksu sold the music rights. It has been covered by various artists across the world in various languages. Another successful Aksu collaboration was the hit single "Þýkýdým" (Shake).[15] His entry into the European musical consciousness started a Turkish pop boom in Germany and Turkey in the 1990s, with his European successes signalling that the musical borders between Turkey and Europe, more specifically Germany, were dissolving.[16] Because of his success, he became the prime example of Turkish pop obtaining an audience outside Turkey.[16] Over the years his works have maintained their popularity, with Tarkan's 2007 studio album Metamorfoz selling over a quarter of a million copies in the first two weeks of its release on December 25, 2007.[17]
[edit]Beginnings
When the Tevetoðlu family relocated to Turkey, Tarkan began to study music in Karamürsel at high school, before being accepted at the Üsküdar Musiki Cemiyeti Academy in Istanbul.[18] After his family moved to Istanbul in 1988, he began to prepare for University entrance exams in 1990, but had a difficult time in Istanbul with little money, and worked in low-paying jobs including a stint as a wedding singer.[12] Music legend has it just as he was preparing to return to Germany, he met Mehmet Söðütoðlu, chairman of the record company Ýstanbul Plak.[citation needed] Produced by Söðütoðlu, his debut album Yine Sensiz (Without You Again) sold 750 thousand copies after its release in December 1992.[15][citation needed] For the album he had teamed up with then little known songwriter-composer Ozan Çolakoðlu, who later co-produced his albums. Tarkan's debut provoked mingled feelings among the Turks, but it seemed that young people in Turkish cities who were satisfying their hunger with new sounds from Westerns acts such as Michael Jackson and U2 were looking for their own home grown idol. Considered rebellious for his lyrics, his dressing style and his earrings by traditionalists made him even more attractive to the young. Although his debut album was not extraordinary when compared to other pop albums of the period, what distinguished Tarkan from the earliest days of his musical career was his unique style and image.[19]
“	It happened maybe for the first time in the world of [Turkish] music, that "slang" words were used in songs and the brave young man began to draw attention as much with his songs as with his green eyes.[11]	„

[edit]Þýkýdým era 
The success of Tarkan in the early 90s was seen by some as a sign of growing admiration for Western music, and the artist's real success came two years later. Collaborating with Turkey's "little sparrow", prominent producer and songwriter Sezen Aksu,[20] Tarkan's highly anticipated second album Aacayipsin (Oh - You're Something Else) sold more than two million copies in Turkey and 750 thousand copies in Europe.[15][citation needed] Such high European sales were a first-time feat for a Turkish performer. Aksu wrote two songs for the album, the radio friendly "Hepsi Senin Mi?", which was later relicensed as "Þýkýdým" (Shake) for the European market, and a pop-rock number "Þeytan Azapta". "Hepsi Senin Mi?" incorporated shaky Turkish rhythms and lyrics of pure slang, and in the video to the song Tarkan slanted his body to the rhythmic melody of the song while displaying a naked chest. This was considered to be bold and daring in the newly opening but still conservative Turkish music industry.[12] Building on his taboo-breaking and rebellious image, the video to "Þeytan Azapta" incorporated scenes from the tour that followed, where dancers would strip Tarkan naked on stage. This erotic persona was enhanced by the artist posing naked and semi-naked for the most popular Turkish magazines of the period,[21] including becoming the first male to make the front cover of the domestic edition of the Cosmopolitan (Cosmo).[12]
In 1994 he experienced a dip in the new found celebrity status the album had generated, when he made a live broadcast gaffe on private Turkish TV channel ATV's anniversary celebration during an interview. His response when asked how he was, captured live on camera, was "Çiþim var, aðabey." ("I've gotta pee, man.") He was publicly criticised for the comment and only after performing traditional songs on another TV special did he endear himself again to the nation.[3]
In part to remove himself from media scrutiny, Tarkan moved to New York, USA in 1994 to complete his education at Baruch College and learn English in the U.S.[22] During this period he filmed a video to another song from his second album, "Dön Bebeðim", in New York. Again Tarkan stripped for this project, but this time he wasn't alone. Sharing a bed with a female American model for the slow love song, the opening scenes of the video show the two naked and simulating the aftermath of a love scene. Unused sex scenes from the video are still aired on celebrity entertainment programmes from time to time in Turkey.[23] While in America, he met the Turkish founder of Atlantic Records, Ahmet Ertegün, who had seen him perform in Istanbul at the celebrations of the TV-station during which he had made his speech gaffe.[12] Tarkan has described Ertegün as his mentor in music and business.[24] Ertegün, who died in December 2006, had long been preparing Tarkan for an American career,[3] but Tarkan re-started his English debut album several times.[25]
[edit]Universal kisses 
In July, 1997 the hit song "Þýmarýk" kick started promotions in Turkey for his third studio album Ölürüm Sana (I'd Die For You). This album took a total of three years to complete. Tarkan collaborated once more with Aksu and music engineer Çolakoðlu for the album, which would go on to become his highest grossing album and win the artist his first music industry award for his song "Þýmarýk". In Turkey alone, Ölürüm Sana sold 4.5 million copies. However, it was only an indication of things to come.[15][citation needed]
Signed by the French branch of recording label PolyGram (now Universal Music) after the single "Þýmarýk" was released in Europe in 1999, Tarkan reached number three in places like Switzerland,[26] the Netherlands,[27] France, and Germany the song also reached number one in Belgium. He was awarded gold disc at the Cannes Midem Awards. As the first artist of Turkish origin to sell 500,000 albums in France, in an interview for CNN he said: "It feels wild, you know, because in the beginning I never thought it was going to really happen. It's all in Turkish, you know, and nobody understands a word. But I think it's a groove. It's the kisses that are universal."[24]
Following the success of the single, Tarkan released a compilation album for Europe entitled Tarkan. He won a World Music Award in Monaco for its rapid sales. He released two more singles in Europe under the Universal ticket: "Þýkýdým" and "Bu Gece" ("Tonight").[15][citation needed]
Tarkan travelled throughout Europe and Latin America to promote his music. Appearing in Ukraine, Morocco, Tunisia and Russia, he gave a total of eighteen concerts in seventeen European cities. In Latin America the album provided Tarkan with a strong fan base, especially in Mexico, where Universal Music funded a promotional tour at the end of 1999.[28] However, this visit had to be postponed until the second week of March 2000, because Tarkan was called up for military service, which he had suspended to allow for studies in New York. In 2000, the self-titled album was released in the USA with a Universal Latino ticket. Sales went platinum in Latin America.[29]
This album was also to mark an end in his successful musical partnership with Aksu and temporarily end friendly relations between the two artists. A copyright dispute erupted between Tarkan and Aksu over the track "Þýmarýk", which ultimately blocked the singer's chance to release an English-language version of the song. The music was initially credited as composed by Aksu, Tarkan and Çolakoðlu, but Tarkan later admitted in a 2006 interview that this had been done without Aksu's consent, who was the true copyright owner.[30] During the dispute, Sezen Aksu released the publishing rights instead to other artists, including Holly Valance.
[edit]Military service
At the height of his fame in 1999, Tarkan was called up for military service, which had been legally deferred since 1995. The deadline for commencement had ended in 1998, but due to contractual obligations abroad after the success of his compilation album he did not return to Turkey to do his military service. The media discussed whether Tarkan should be viewed as a deserter and stripped of his citizenship; even the Turkish parliament discussed the issue.[31][32] After the August 1999 earthquake shook Turkey, the 28-day military service was passed, which allowed for a very short term of service provided that those covered by the law paid $16,000 for the benefit of the earthquake victims.[3] Tarkan returned to Turkey in 2000 and took advantage of this law, completing his service in twenty-eight days. Before entering the army, he gave a return concert in Istanbul, the benefits of which were donated to an earthquake victims' fund.[12] Of his time in military training, he said:
“	It was January and snowing like crazy. It was tough; the food was terrible. Eighteen months of my life for nothing? I thought my own dreams were more important.[3]	„

[edit]Karma (2001-2002)
In January 2001, Tarkan joined a global brand and became the first Pepsi spokesperson in Turkey. This preceded the release of his album Karma and for the first time two singles in his domestic market in the same year: "Kuzu Kuzu" ("Like A Lamb") and "Hüp" ("Whoop"). Although Karma was not released worldwide, it was distributed in large shipments to Russia, where he had become the largest-selling non-Russian pop star. A million copies shipped to other areas of Europe, including Denmark.[3] His so-called Karma-era style projected an image totally different from his earlier persona, with regard to both music and looks.[21] His appearance – tight trousers, loose, unbuttoned shirts or tight T-shirts - and his new hairdo set a trend among young Turkish men, who started to copy his looks.[33] According to hairdressers, his Kuzu Kuzu hairstyle is still the most frequently requested style in the salons of Turkey.[34] During this time he met Michael Lang, co-organiser of the Woodstock Festival, who became his international manager. According to Lang,
“	Tarkan is a great singer and his performance is great. His current success is only the beginning in my opinion. He'll be a star in five year's time and he will not fade away. Know this, he is here to stay. He has an indescribable charisma.[35]	„

This period was not free of scandals, either. In 2001 researcher Dr. N Aysun Yüksel published a book titled Tarkan – Yýldýz Olgusu (Tarkan – Anatomy of a Star), which was withdrawn from bookshelves by a court order after Tarkan's lawyer Süheyl Atay sued the writer. According to the court's decision the book published personal information and copyrighted photos of the artist, and violated his good reputation.[36] Another scandal broke out when the video for the single "Hüp" was released. The Turkish Radio and Television Supreme Council considered banning the video, directed by Ferzan Özpetek, from television broadcast, as some viewers complained that the scene in which Tarkan kisses actress Sinemis Candemir was too "explicit" and "pornographic". The case was reported through Europe by the BBC.[32] There was no ban, and fans had their say by voting it the video of the year in 2001 at Kral music station's video awards.
After becoming the face of Pepsi in Turkey, Tarkan also became the official mascot of the Turkish national football team for the 2002 World Cup. He recorded the football song "Bir Oluruz Yolunda" ("United For You"), which became an anthem for the fans.[15][citation needed]
[edit]Dudu (2003-2004)
His EP/hybrid album Dudu (Woman) was the first to be released by his own label HITT Music, in the summer of 2003. It was the first album of its kind to sell over a million copies in Turkey, while the title track won Tarkan a "Song of the Year Award" in Russia.[37] Because his successful creative partnership with Aksu had ended over the ownership of "Þýmarýk", he worked with singer-songwriter Nazan Öncel on both Karma and Dudu. Öncel's own Yan Yana Fotoðraf Çektirelim album was published under the HITT label. He also released his own perfume line entitled "Tarkan" at the start of 2004.
Although musically a continuation from Karma, image-wise Dudu presented different visuals from the 2001-2003 period. Sexuality became secondary in terms of fashion and concerts were toned down to become intimate affairs.[38] The new image portrayed a more laid back Tarkan sporting shorter hair, and wearing less glamorous designs. It was a declaration that glitz and sex were no longer a necessary tool to sell his works. Indicating his desire to show different sides of his personality, "It's not important how sexy I look or whether I dance sexy," he said of his new look.[39]
[edit]Coming closer to Europe (2005-2006)
Tarkan in Vienna, 2006


Tarkan

Tarkan with fans
Hungarian envoy greet Tarkan
In 2005, Tarkan finally announced that his English language album was ready after over a decade of effort. The plans for Come Closer began in 1995, when media mogul Ahmet Ertegün encouraged Tarkan to break into the international market.[3] Eventually, he managed to break through without the aid of an English language album with "Þýmarýk", but Tarkan's manager, Ahmet San, entered Tarkan into contractual obligations that would hinder further success in Europe. In the framework of a larger agreement with Ertegün's Atlantic Records, Tarkan had tied his artist's rights to a French publishing company, Jonathan Productions, in which San owned shares. The contract specified that Tarkan could not release his own works without the company's permission. Once "Þýmarýk" hit the international stage, Tarkan was virtually blocked from releasing anything, as Charles Ibgui, the director of Jonathan Productions, stated in a letter sent to the artist's then domestic label Ýstanbul Plak: "neither Tarkan nor his producer Mehmet Söðütoðlu can without our permission release any album in any language anywhere in the world".[25] This dissolved the relationship between singer and manager San. Consequently, Tarkan later commented in a newspaper interview that San had "destroyed his American dream" and the English album "had been scrapped".[40] The delay to the initial incarnation of the English album had also been delayed due to disagreements with Ertegün concerning the concept of the defunct album. Ertegün preferred something more American in style, while Tarkan insisted on including many Turkish elements.[25]
On October 10, 2005, Tarkan finally released his debut English language single "Bounce" in Turkey. Come Closer was released in parts of Europe on April 7, 2006, by the Universal Music label. The album features such songwriters as Lester Mendez, who co-wrote Shakira's "Underneath Your Clothes"; Brian Kierulf, who produced songs for Britney Spears;[41] and singer Wyclef Jean, with who Tarkan recorded the song "Aman Aman". "Bounce" was released in Germany a few days after the release of the album. The German version of the single included an oriental remix, as well as a hip-hop version featuring American reggaeton singer Adassa. A second single, "Start the Fire", was released in August; it included a remix by Turkish DJ Mousse T. A music video for the Mousse T. version was also produced prior to the single's release.
The album was not a breakthrough success. It was released only in a few European countries and Turkey, and Tarkan appeared on several television shows to promote the album in Germany, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Romania and Russia. The promised world wide tour effectively only included a few Central and Eastern European countries, Azerbaijan, Russia, Austria and Germany.[42] Worldwide release was postponed and domestic sales did not approach the success of his previous albums, with only 110,000 copies sold in Turkey.[43]
This period, like others, was stamped with scandal. A Turkish music pirate, well before the official release, leaked four stolen demo recordings from the debut English album onto the internet.[44] Thousands of copies were downloaded illegally before the album's official release. The leaked songs garnered considerable airplay in dance clubs in Turkey, before Tarkan's management took legal action against DJ's playing them.[45]
[edit]Metamorphosis (2007-2008)
Tarkan released another Turkish language album on December 25, 2007, which was comprised almost solely of his own work. Called Metamorfoz ("metamorphosis" in English), seven of the songs were written by Tarkan, three other songs were collaborations with long-time engineer and producer Çolakoðlu.[46] The album sold over 300,000 copies in the first two weeks of its release.[17] Tarkan also became the most downloaded artist at TTNetMüzik, a digital music provider where his songs were made legally available in a digital format at the start of January 2008. Out of nearly two million tracks that were purchased after six weeks downloading, nearly 100,000 of those acquired were Tarkan songs, making him the highest grossing single artist at the music portal.[47]
Unlike the public's reception, the critical response to Metamorfoz was lukewarm. Most music critics found the album musically lacking from Tarkan's previous albums, though not all.[48] Ecevit Kýlýç, columnist for Sabah newspaper, hailed Tarkan on his return and called him the "Orhan Pamuk of music", saying that Tarkan, just like Nobel-awarded Pamuk, always does everything his own way, despite all the attacks he has received from the press.[49] Tarkan received congratulations from the chairman of the Turkish Language Association for his lyricsmanship by using correct language, traditional idioms and sayings in his lyrics, showing it was said a good example to Turkish youth in preserving the culture of the Turkish language.[50] Besides the sales success, Tarkan also produced the third highest viewer rating with his New Year's Eve performance on TRT television channel,[51] generating a total of 1 million YTL income for the television from sponsors.[52]
The album was released in Germany on February 1, 2008, by Urban.[53]
[edit]Write My Name Across Your Heart (2010-2011)
Tarkan released his eighth album, Adimi kalbine Yaz, on 29 July 2010. The album received highly positive reaction from critics and also his fans all around the world. It sold more than 300000 copies one week after its release and the singles of the album topped the music charts of turkey.
[edit]Popularity



Tarkan with fans
Tarkan is undoubtedly one of the most popular singers in Turkey. In addition to his record-breaking album sales, he is known for staging concerts that draw tens of thousands of people.[54] In 2004, at the "Karadeniz Ereðli Love, Peace and Friendship Festival" approximately 700,000 people watched his concert, while in 2006 authorities reported almost the same numbers. "I've never seen such a sight before. I'll never forget this picture as long as I live," he said after the 2004 festival.[55] In 2006 he also performed in Eastern Thrace, in front of an audience of 50,000.[56]
His popular image has been courted by several companies; he became the face first for Pepsi, then for two Turkish telephone companies, Turkcell and Avea.[57] His 2003 tour was sponsored by Opet and he shot three television advertisements for them. Tarkan's popularity can also be measured by the fact that he became the first Turkish singer to require personal security guards. His bodyguard is Levent Aðaoðlu, the founder of Legend Security.[58] Aðaoðlu's company is also responsible for the security of Tarkan's house in Istanbul, and the office of his production company HITT. His bodyguards escort him during his personal travels as well.[59] ‹The template Rquote is being considered for deletion.› 
“	He's a great dancer, he moves beautifully, and he has the magic that all big hit artists share, which is the ability to get an emotion across through a recording.[3]	”
In recent years, Tarkan has gained international recognition beyond his parents' native Turkey. He is popular in Eastern European countries like Romania and Bulgaria, and in Russia, where he has performed extensively.[60] In 2006 He gave his first Middle Eastern concert in Dubai in front of 9,000 people.[61][62] He is also known in Israel, Cyprus, Greece, Macedonia, the UK and the USA, mainly among the Turkish diaspora. His popularity in the United Kingdom, although Tarkan has never charted there, is also evident from the success of his Wembley Arena concert, given in London, on 13 April 2008, where he was interviewed by BBC radio prior to the event.[63]
While his song "Þýmarýk" has been sampled by various artists in these countries, the lucrative film industry in India has also poached several Tarkan hits, including "Þýkýdým", "Kuzu Kuzu" and "Dudu", for various Bollywood films.[64][65] His Kýþ Güneþi song has been chosen as one of "The Unforgettable Hits of Turkish Music" by Hürriyet newspaper.[66] Tarkan also has many fans in Iran. In conjunction with the release of Metamorfoz, Tarkan became the first Turksh artist to have a mp3 player named after him. German manufacturer of storage products and audio devices TrekStor joined up with Tarkan for their mp3 player series i.Beat. Packed with special features, the digital player was titled the i.Beat Emo Tarkan edition.[67]
[edit]Paparazzi terror
The dark side of Tarkan's popularity comes with the media, particularly with the paparazzi. On 29 December 2007, Tarkan gave an interview to Taraf, explaining how the Turkish paparazzi terrorised him when he was leaving the studio of TRT, the national television channel, where he was recording his New Year's Eve concert. Upon leaving the building a group of 10-15 paparazzi, angered by Tarkan's refusal of answering their questions, started to smack and kick his car, shouting offensive words, and blocked his way with their vehicles. When finally the singer's car managed to take road, they followed him to his home, where already other media personnel were waiting for him to arrive. The mass of paparazzi blocked the entrance to his house, and thus the singer was forced to flee to a hotel and spend the night there. He gave the interview to Taraf in the hotel and published the newspaper article on his official website, aiming to direct attention to the dangerous behaviour of the Turkish yellow press.[68] Tarkan has had similar dangerous clashes with the paparazzi before: in May 2007 he was forced into a street pursuit on the road to Mount Olympos near Antalya. That time his angry comments about journalists' behaviour were printed in almost all newspapers.[69]
[edit]The PETA Controversy
In February 2008, the animal rights organization PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) commenced a drive to persuade Tarkan to swear off fur after being spotted wearing fur on the cover of his 2005 album, Come Closer, which featured a coat with a fur lined collar. PETA encouraged its members to send personal email messages to Tarkan and his management, in the hope the artist would set an example for his many fans by quitting the use of fur.[70] Tarkan is well known for his humanitarian efforts towards stray animals, and publicly announced he had regretted wearing the fur lined coat and would join an animal rights' movement.[71]
[edit]Personal life

‹The template Rquote is being considered for deletion.› 
“	Men [spread these rumours about my homosexuality]! Definitely. It's because I destroy [the image] they try to show off as manhood![72]	”
—Tarkan, Hürriyet
Tarkan does not like to talk about his personal life, which has partly fueled the "is he-is he not gay" discussion, and the subject of his relationships often fills the front pages of Turkish newspapers and magazines. In 2001, when Tarkan was moving houses in New York, a worker stole what the domestic media tried to portray as compromising photos which suggested his homosexuality, but were simply photos with other men in swimwear in a public nude beach.[73]
In a special interview to Hürriyet, Tarkan contested the widespread assumption that he was gay.[72] Tarkan subsequently gave fewer and fewer interviews and television appearances, limiting himself to a small number of trusted journalists. In 2006, he claimed that his relationship with the media had gone wrong.
In a rare interview in 2006 he said, "There's a trust crisis between me and the media. I'm fed up with being forced into arguments, that all my words are twisted around. I don't want to do it any more. It's no fun any longer. They are aiming right for my head ... When I go to America, I'm so jealous of their talk shows. There are no such things in Turkey. Who shall I talk to in Turkey, in which talk show? Plus, they would film me in ridiculous places and I would end up being shown as someone I'm not. And in the end, the topic will always come back to the same question: 'Are you gay? Are you bisexual?'"[74]
He was together with female lawyer Bilge Öztürk for 7 years until they amicably split in 2008.[75] The artist has been quoted in the media several times as regarding the institution of marriage to be outdated, stating he would only get married if he had children for their benefit.[76] Tarkan owns a ranch-like property in Polonezköy, Istanbul, where he cultivates fruit trees and keeps animals.[77] Tarkan also owns a flat in Murray Hill, New York, worth approximately 5 million dollars, according to the Turkish press [78] (the flat was sold on 6/29/2010 for $1,475,000).
[edit]Awards

This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.
List of awards Tarkan has won during his career:[79]
International
1999, World Music Awards (Monaco)
Best Selling Middle Eastern Artist:[80] Tarkan
1999, Record Fair MIDEM (Cannes)
Best Selling Pop Single:[81] Þýmarýk
2004, The Pud Award (Russia)
"Song of the Year":[37] Dudu
Domestic
1998 Kral TV Müzik Ödülleri
Yýlýn Þarkýsý (Song of the Year):[82] Þýmarýk
2001 MGD Altin Objektif Ödülleri[83]
Yýlýn En Ýyi Pop Müzik Sanatçýsý (Best pop singer of the year)
2001 Kral TV Müzik Ödülleri
Yýlýn Erkek Pop Sanatçýsý (Male Pop Singer of the Year)[84]
Yýlýn Þarkýsý (Song of the Year):[85] Kuzu Kuzu
Yýlýn Videosu (Video of the Year): Hup
2002 MGD Altin Objektif Ödülleri[86]
En Ýyi Erkek Yorumcu (Best male singer)
Yýlýn Albümü (Album of the year): Karma
2003 Kral TV Müzik Ödülleri[87]
En iyi pop erkek (Best male pop singer)
2011 Kral TV Müzik Ödülleri[88]
En Ýyi Albüm (Best Album): Adýmý Kalbine Yaz
En Ýyi Erkek Sanatçý (Best Male Artist)
En Ýyi Þarký (Best song): Sevdanýn Son Vuruþu
En Ýyi Beste (Best composition of a song): Sevdanýn Son Vuruþu
Radyolarda En Çok Çalýnan Sanatçý (Most Played Artist for Airplay)
Müyap (Yýlýn En Çok Satan Albümü) (Best Selling Album of the Year): Adýmý Kalbine Yaz
[edit]Discography

Main article: Tarkan discography
[edit]Albums
Yine Sensiz (December 1992)
Aacayipsin (April 1994)
Ölürüm Sana (July 1997)
Tarkan (International debut) (September 1998)
Karma (July 2001)
Dudu (June 2003)
Come Closer (First English album) (April 2006)
Metamorfoz (December 2007)
Metamorfoz Remixes (July 2008)
Adýmý Kalbine Yaz (July 2010)
[edit]Singles
"Þýmarýk" (International) (September 1998)
"Þýkýdým" (International) (February 1999)
"Bu Gece" (International) (July 1999)
"Kuzu Kuzu" (Domestic) (August 2001)
"Hüp" (Domestic) (October 2001)
"Bounce" (Domestic/International) (October 2005/January 2006)
"Start the Fire" (Domestic/International) (March 2006)
"Uyan" (feat. Orhan Gencebay) (Domestic (October 2008)
"Sevdanýn Son Vuruþu" (Domestic) (May 2010)
"Adýmý Kalbine Yaz" - "(Write My Name Onto Your Heart)" (August 2010)
[edit]Domestic Promo Singles
Özgürlük Ýçimizde (2002)
Bir Oluruz Yolunda (2002)
Ayrýlýk Zor (2005)
Uyan (2008)
Sevdanýn Son Vuruþu (2010)
[edit]See also

Tarkan discography
Sezen Aksu
Turkish pop music
Similar artists
[edit]Further reading


Etymology
In the United States, the war was initially described by President Harry S. Truman as a "police action" as it was conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.[32] Colloquially, it has been referred to in the United States as The Forgotten War or The Unknown War. The issues concerned were much less clear than in previous and subsequent conflicts, such as World War II and the Vietnam War.[33][34] To a significant degree, the war has been "historically overshadowed by World War II and Vietnam".[35]
In South Korea the war is usually referred to as "625" or the 6–2–5 Upheaval (yug-i-o dongnan), reflecting the date of its commencement on 25 June.[36] In North Korea the war is officially referred to as the Fatherland Liberation War (Choguk haebang chonjaeng). Alternatively, it is called the Choson chonjaeng ("Choson war", Choson being what North Koreans call Korea).[37] In the People's Republic of China the war is called the War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea (traditional Chinese: ??????; simplified Chinese: ??????; pinyin: Kàngmeiyuáncháo zhànzheng).[38][39] The "Korean War" (????/????; pinyin: Cháoxian zhànzheng) is more commonly used today. Cháoxian is the Chinese pronunciation of the Korean name "Choson".
Japanese rule (1910–1945)
Main article: Korea under Japanese rule
Upon defeating the Qing Dynasty in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–96), the Empire of Japan occupied the Korean Empire – a peninsula strategic to its sphere of influence.[40] A decade later, defeating Imperial Russia in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05), Japan made Korea its protectorate with the Eulsa Treaty in 1905, then annexed it with the Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty in 1910.[41][42]
Korean nationalists and the intelligentsia fled the country, and some founded the Provisional Korean Government in 1919, which was headed by Syngman Rhee in Shanghai. This government-in-exile was recognized by few countries. From 1919 to 1925 and beyond, Korean communists led and were the primary agents of internal and external warfare against the Japanese.[40]:23[43]
Korea under Japanese rule was considered to be part of the Empire of Japan as an industrialized colony along with Taiwan, and both were part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. In 1937, the colonial Governor–General, General Jiro Minami, commanded the attempted cultural assimilation of Korea's 23.5 million people by banning the use and study of Korean language, literature, and culture, to be replaced with that of mandatory use and study of their Japanese counterparts. Starting in 1939, the populace was required to use Japanese names under the Soshi-kaimei policy. In 1938, the Colonial Government established labor conscription.[citation needed]
In China, the National Revolutionary Army and the Communist People's Liberation Army helped organize refugee Korean patriots and independence fighters against the Japanese military, which had also occupied parts of China. The Nationalist-backed Koreans, led by Yi Pom-Sok, fought in the Burma Campaign (December 1941 – August 1945). The Communists, led by Kim Il-sung, fought the Japanese in Korea and Manchuria.[citation needed]
During World War II, the Japanese used Korea's food, livestock, and metals for their war effort. Japanese forces in Korea increased from 46,000 soldiers in 1941 to 300,000 in 1945. Japanese Korea conscripted 2.6 million forced laborers controlled with a collaborationist Korean police force; some 723,000 people were sent to work in the overseas empire and in metropolitan Japan. By 1942, Korean men were being conscripted into the Imperial Japanese Army. By January 1945, Koreans comprised 32% of Japan's labor force. In August 1945, when the United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, around 25% of those killed were Koreans.[43] At the end of the war, other world powers did not recognize Japanese rule in Korea and Taiwan.
Meanwhile, at the Cairo Conference (November 1943), Nationalist China, the United Kingdom, and the United States decided "in due course Korea shall become free and independent".[44] Later, the Yalta Conference (February 1945) granted to the Soviet Union European "buffer zones"—satellite states accountable to Moscow—as well as an expected Soviet pre-eminence in China and Manchuria,[45] in return for joining the Allied Pacific War effort against Japan.[45]
Soviet invasion of Manchuria (1945)
Main article: Soviet invasion of Manchuria (1945)
Toward the end of World War II, as per a US-Soviet agreement, the USSR declared war against Japan on 9 August 1945.[43][46] By 10 August, the Red Army occupied the northern part of the Korean peninsula as agreed, and on 26 August halted at the 38th parallel for three weeks to await the arrival of US forces in the south.[40]:25[40]:24
On 10 August 1945, with the 15 August Japanese surrender near, the Americans doubted whether the Soviets would honor their part of the Joint Commission, the US-sponsored Korean occupation agreement. A month earlier, Colonel Dean Rusk and Colonel Charles H. Bonesteel III divided the Korean peninsula at the 38th parallel after hurriedly deciding (in thirty minutes) that the US Korean Zone of Occupation had to have a minimum of two ports.[47][48][49][50][51]
Explaining why the occupation zone demarcation was positioned at the 38th parallel, Rusk observed, "even though it was further north than could be realistically reached by US forces, in the event of Soviet disagreement ... we felt it important to include the capital of Korea in the area of responsibility of American troops", especially when "faced with the scarcity of US forces immediately available, and time and space factors, which would make it difficult to reach very far north, before Soviet troops could enter the area."[45] The Soviets agreed to the US occupation zone demarcation to improve their negotiating position regarding the occupation zones in Eastern Europe, and because each would accept Japanese surrender where they stood.[40]:25
Chinese Civil War (1945–1949)
Main article: Chinese Civil War
After the end of Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese Civil War resumed between the Chinese Communists and the Chinese Nationalists. While the Communists were struggling for supremacy in Manchuria, they were supported by the North Korean government with materiel and manpower.[52] According to Chinese sources, the North Koreans donated 2,000 railway cars worth of material while thousands of Korean "volunteers" served in the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) during the war.[53] North Korea also provided the Chinese Communists in Manchuria with a safe refuge for non-combatants and communications with the rest of China.[52]
The North Korean contributions to the Chinese Communist victory were not forgotten after the creation of the People's Republic of China in 1949. As a token of gratitude, between 50,000 to 70,000 Korean veterans that served in the PLA were sent back along with their weapons, and they would later play a significant role in the initial invasion of South Korea.[52] China promised to support the North Koreans in the event of a war against South Korea.[54] The Chinese support created a deep division between the Korean Communists, and Kim Il-Sung's authority within the Communist party was challenged by the Chinese faction led by Pak Il-yu, who was later purged by Kim.[55]
After the formation of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the Chinese government named the Western nations, led by the United States, as the biggest threat to its national security.[56] Basing this judgment on China's century of humiliation beginning in the early 19th century,[57] American support for the Nationalists during the Chinese Civil War,[58] and the ideological struggles between revolutionaries and reactionaries,[59] the Chinese leadership believed that China would become a critical battleground in the United States' crusade against Communism.[60] As a countermeasure and to elevate China's standing among the worldwide Communist movements, the Chinese leadership adopted a foreign policy that actively promoted Communist revolutions throughout territories on China's periphery.[61]
Korea divided (1945–1949)
See also: Division of Korea
At the Potsdam Conference (July–August 1945), the Allies unilaterally decided to divide Korea—without consulting the Koreans—in contradiction of the Cairo Conference.[40]:24[48]:24–5[62]:25[63]
On 8 September 1945, Lt. Gen. John R. Hodge of the United States arrived in Incheon to accept the Japanese surrender south of the 38th parallel.[48] Appointed as military governor, General Hodge directly controlled South Korea via the United States Army Military Government in Korea (USAMGIK 1945–48).[64]:63 He established control by restoring to power the key Japanese colonial administrators and their Korean police collaborators.[31] The USAMGIK refused to recognise the provisional government of the short-lived People's Republic of Korea (PRK) because he suspected it was communist. These policies, voiding popular Korean sovereignty, provoked civil insurrections and guerrilla warfare.[41] On 3 September 1945, Lieutenant General Yoshio Kozuki, Commander, Japanese Seventeenth Area Army, contacted Hodge, telling him that the Soviets were south of the 38th parallel at Kaesong. Hodge trusted the accuracy of the Japanese Army report.[48]
In December 1945, Korea was administered by a US–USSR Joint Commission, as agreed at the Moscow Conference (1945). The Koreans were excluded from the talks. The commission decided the country would become independent after a five-year trusteeship action facilitated by each régime sharing its sponsor's ideology.[40]:25–6[65] The Korean populace revolted; in the south, some protested, and some rose in arms;[41] to contain them, the USAMGIK banned strikes on 8 December 1945 and outlawed the PRK Revolutionary Government and the PRK People's Committees on 12 December 1945.
On 23 September 1946 an 8,000-strong railroad worker strike began in Pusan. Civil disorder spread throughout the country in what became known as the Autumn uprising. On 1 October 1946, Korean police killed three students in the Daegu Uprising; protesters counter-attacked, killing 38 policemen. On 3 October, some 10,000 people attacked the Yeongcheon police station, killing three policemen and injuring some 40 more; elsewhere, some 20 landlords and pro-Japanese South Korean officials were killed.[66] The USAMGIK declared martial law.
The right-wing Representative Democratic Council, led by nationalist Syngman Rhee, opposed the Soviet–American trusteeship of Korea, arguing that after 35 years (1910–45) of Japanese colonial rule most Koreans opposed another foreign occupation. The USAMGIK decided to forego the five year trusteeship agreed upon in Moscow, given the 31 March 1948 United Nations election deadline to achieve an anti-communist civil government in the US Korean Zone of Occupation.
On 3 April what began as a demonstration commemorating Korean resistance to Japanese rule ended with the Jeju massacre of as many as 60,000 citizens by South Korean soldiers.[67]
On 10 May, South Korea convoked their first national general elections that the Soviets first opposed, then boycotted, insisting that the US honor the trusteeship agreed to at the Moscow Conference.[40]:26[68][69][70]
North Korea held parliamentary elections three months later on 25 August 1948.[71]
The resultant anti-communist South Korean government promulgated a national political constitution on 17 July 1948, elected a president, the American-educated strongman Syngman Rhee on 20 July 1948. The elections were marred by terrorism and sabotage resulting in 600 deaths.[72] The Republic of Korea (South Korea) was established on 15 August 1948.[73] In the Russian Korean Zone of Occupation, the USSR established a Communist North Korean government[40]:26 led by Kim Il-sung.[74] President Rhee's régime expelled communists and leftists from southern national politics. Disenfranchised, they headed for the hills, to prepare for guerrilla war against the US-sponsored ROK Government.[74]
As nationalists, both Syngman Rhee and Kim Il-Sung were intent upon reunifying Korea under their own political system.[40]:27 With Joseph Stalin and Mao Zedong fighting over the control of the Korean Peninsula,[75] the North Koreans gained support from both the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. They escalated the continual border skirmishes and raids and then prepared to invade. South Korea, with limited matériel, could not match them.[40]:27 During this era, at the beginning of the Cold War, the US government assumed that all communists, regardless of nationality, were controlled or directly influenced by Moscow; thus the US portrayed the civil war in Korea as a Soviet hegemonic maneuver.[76]
In October 1948, South Korean left-wing soldiers rebelled against the government's harsh clampdown in April on Jeju island in the Yeosu-Suncheon Rebellion.[77]
The Soviet Union withdrew as agreed from Korea in 1948. U.S. troops withdrew from Korea in 1949, leaving the South Korean army relatively ill-equipped. On 24 December 1949, South Korean forces killed 86 to 88 people in the Mungyeong massacre and blamed the crime on communist marauding bands.[78]
Course of the war

The conflict begins (June 1950)


Territory often changed hands early in the war, until the front stabilized.
In April 1950 Kim Il-sung travelled to Moscow and secured Stalin's support for a policy to unify Korea under his authority. Although agreeing with the invasion of South Korea in principle, Stalin refused to become directly involved in Kim's plans, and advised Kim to enlist Chinese support instead. In May 1950 Kim visited Beijing, and succeeded in gaining Mao's endorsement. At the time, Mao's support for Kim was largely political (he was contemplating the invasions of Taiwan and Tibet), and was unaware of Kim's precise intentions or the timing of Kim's attack. When the Korean war broke out, the Chinese were in the process of demobilizing half of the PLA's 5.6 million soldiers.[79]
After the US missions had left the People's Republic of China, CIA China station officer Douglas Mackiernan volunteered to remain and conduct spy operations. Afterward, he and a team of indigenous personnel then escaped China in a months-long horse trek across the Himalaya mountains; he was killed within miles of Lhasa. His team delivered the intelligence to headquarters that invasion was imminent. Thirteen days later on 25 June 1950, the North Korean People's Army (KPA) crossed the 38th parallel border and invaded South Korea. Mackiernan was posthumously awarded the CIA Intelligence Star for valor.[80]
Under the guise of counter-attacking a South Korean provocation raid, the KPA crossed the 38th parallel behind artillery fire at dawn on Sunday 25 June 1950.[40]:14 The KPA said that Republic of Korea Army (ROK Army) troops, under command of the régime of the "bandit traitor Syngman Rhee", had crossed the border first, and that they would arrest and execute Rhee.[48] Both Korean armies had continually harassed each other with skirmishes and each continually staged raids across the 38th parallel border.
On 27 June, Rhee evacuated from Seoul with government officials. Rhee ordered the Bodo League massacre, which started on 28 June.[81]
On 28 June, South Korea bombed the bridge across the Han River to stop the North Korean army.[82]
Early on in the fighting, South Korea put its forces under the authority of the United Nations Command (Korea).[citation needed]
Factors in US intervention
The Truman Administration was caught at a crossroads. Before the invasion, Korea was not included in the strategic Asian Defense Perimeter outlined by Secretary of State Acheson.[83] Military strategists were more concerned with the security of Europe against the Soviet Union than East Asia. At the same time, the Administration was worried that a war in Korea could quickly widen into another world war should the Chinese or Soviets decide to get involved as well.
One facet of the changing attitude toward Korea and whether to get involved was Japan. Especially after the fall of China to the Communists, "…Japan itself increasingly appeared as the major East Asian prize to be protected". US East Asian experts saw Japan as the critical counterweight to the Soviet Union and China in the region. While there was no United States policy that dealt with South Korea directly as a national interest, its proximity to Japan pushed South Korea to the fore. "The recognition that the security of Japan required a non-hostile Korea led directly to President Truman’s decision to intervene… The essential point… is that the American response to the North Korean attack stemmed from considerations of US policy toward Japan."[83] The United States wanted to shore up Japan to make it a viable counterweight against the Soviet Union and China, and Korea was seen as integral to that end.
The other important part of committing to intervention lay in speculation about Soviet action in the event that the United States intervene. The Truman administration was fretful that a war in Korea was a diversionary assault that would escalate to a general war in Europe once the US committed in Korea. At the same time, "[t]here was no suggestion from anyone that the United Nations or the United States could back away from [the conflict]".[84] In Truman’s mind, this aggression, if left unchecked, would start a chain reaction that would destroy the United Nations and give the go ahead to further Communist aggression elsewhere. Korea was where a stand had to be made, the difficult part was how. The UN Security council approved the use of force to help the South Koreans and the US immediately began using air and naval forces in the area to that end. The Administration still refrained from committing on the ground because some advisors believed the North Koreans could be stopped by air and naval power alone.[84] Also, it was still uncertain if this was a clever ploy by the Soviet Union to catch the US unawares or just a test of US resolve. The decision to commit ground troops and to intervene eventually became viable when a communiqué was received on 27 June from the Soviet Union that alluded it would not move against US forces in Korea. "This opened the way for the sending of American ground forces, for it now seemed less likely that a general war—with Korea as a preliminary diversion—was imminent".[84] With the Soviet Union’s tacit agreement that this would not cause an escalation, the United States now could intervene with confidence that other commitments would not be jeopardized.
United Nations Security Council Resolutions
On 25 June 1950, the United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the North Korean invasion of the Republic of Korea, with United Nations Security Council Resolution 82. The USSR, a veto-wielding power, had boycotted the Council meetings since January 1950, protesting that the Republic of China (Taiwan), not the People's Republic of China, held a permanent seat in the UN Security Council.[85] After debating the matter, the Security Council, on 27 June 1950, published Resolution 83 recommending member states provide military assistance to the Republic of Korea. On 27 June President Truman ordered US air and sea forces to help the South Korean régime. On 4 July the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister accused the US of starting armed intervention on behalf of South Korea.[86]
The USSR challenged the legitimacy of the war for several reasons. The ROK Army intelligence upon which Resolution 83 was based came from US Intelligence; North Korea was not invited as a sitting temporary member of the UN, which violated UN Charter Article 32; and the Korean conflict was beyond UN Charter scope, because the initial north–south border fighting was classed as a civil war. The Soviet representative boycotted the UN to prevent Security Council action, and to challenge the legitimacy of the UN action; legal scholars posited that deciding upon an action of this type required the unanimous vote of the five permanent members.[87][88]
Comparison of military forces
The North Korean Army launched the "Fatherland Liberation War" with a comprehensive air–land invasion using 231,000 soldiers, who captured scheduled objectives and territory, among them Kaesong, Chuncheon, Uijeongbu, and Ongjin. Their forces included 274 T-34-85 tanks, some 150 Yak fighters, 110 attack bombers, 200 artillery pieces, 78 Yak trainers, and 35 reconnaissance aircraft.[48] In addition to the invasion force, the North Korean KPA had 114 fighters, 78 bombers, 105 T-34-85 tanks, and some 30,000 soldiers stationed in reserve in North Korea.[48] Although each navy consisted of only several small warships, the North Korean and South Korean navies fought in the war as sea-borne artillery for their in-country armies.
In contrast, the ROK Army defenders were vastly unprepared, and the political establishment in the south, while well aware of the threat to the north, were unable to convince American administrators of the reality of the threat. In South to the Naktong, North to the Yalu (1961), R.E. Appleman reports the ROK forces' low combat readiness as of 25 June 1950. The ROK Army had 98,000 soldiers (65,000 combat, 33,000 support), no tanks (they had been requested from the US military, but requests were denied), and a 22–piece air force comprising 12 liaison-type and 10 AT6 advanced-trainer airplanes. There were no large foreign military garrisons in Korea at invasion time, but there were large US garrisons and air forces in Japan.[48]
Within days of the invasion, masses of ROK Army soldiers—of dubious loyalty to the Syngman Rhee régime—were either retreating southwards or were defecting en masse to the northern side, the KPA.[40]:23
United Nations response (July – August 1950)


A US howitzer position near the Kum River, 15 July.


Korean civilians pass an M-46 tank


A GI comforts a grieving infantryman.
Despite the rapid post–Second World War Allied demobilizations, there were substantial US forces occupying Japan; under General Douglas MacArthur's command, they could be made ready to fight the North Koreans.[40]:42 Only the British Commonwealth had comparable forces in the area.
On Saturday, 24 June 1950, US Secretary of State Dean Acheson informed President Truman by telephone, "Mr. President, I have very serious news. The North Koreans have invaded South Korea."[89][90] Truman and Acheson discussed a US invasion response with defense department principals, who agreed that the United States was obligated to repel military aggression, paralleling it with Adolf Hitler's 1930s aggressions, and said that the mistake of appeasement must not be repeated.[91] In his autobiography, President Truman acknowledged that fighting the invasion was essential to the American goal of the global containment of communism as outlined in the National Security Council Report 68 (NSC-68) (declassified in 1975):
"Communism was acting in Korea, just as Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese had ten, fifteen, and twenty years earlier. I felt certain that if South Korea was allowed to fall Communist leaders would be emboldened to override nations closer to our own shores. If the Communists were permitted to force their way into the Republic of Korea without opposition from the free world, no small nation would have the courage to resist threat and aggression by stronger Communist neighbors."[92]
President Truman announced that the US would counter "unprovoked aggression" and "vigorously support the effort of the [UN] security council to terminate this serious breach of peace."[90] In Congress, the Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman General Omar Bradley warned against appeasement, saying that Korea was the place "for drawing the line" against communist expansion. In August 1950, the President and the Secretary of State obtained the consent of Congress to appropriate $12 billion to pay for the military expenses.[90]
Per State Secretary Acheson's recommendation, President Truman ordered General MacArthur to transfer materiel to the Army of the Republic of Korea while giving air cover to the evacuation of US nationals. The President disagreed with advisors who recommended unilateral US bombing of the North Korean forces, and ordered the US Seventh Fleet to protect the Republic of China (Taiwan), whose Nationalist Government asked to fight in Korea. The US denied the Nationalist Chinese request for combat, lest it provoke a communist Chinese retaliation.[93] Because the US had sent the Seventh Fleet to "neutralize" the Taiwan Strait, Chinese premier Zhou Enlai criticized both the UN and US initiatives as "armed aggression on Chinese territory."[94]
The Battle of Osan, the first significant American engagement of the Korean War, involved the 540-soldier Task Force Smith, which was a small forward element of the 24th Infantry Division.[40]:45 On 5 July 1950, Task Force Smith attacked the North Koreans at Osan but without weapons capable of destroying the North Koreans' tanks. They were unsuccessful; the result was 180 dead, wounded, or taken prisoner. The KPA progressed southwards, pushing back the US force at Pyongtaek, Chonan, and Chochiwon, forcing the 24th Division's retreat to Taejeon, which the KPA captured in the Battle of Taejon;[40]:48 the 24th Division suffered 3,602 dead and wounded and 2,962 captured, including the Division's Commander, Major General William F. Dean.[40]:48 Overhead, the KPAF shot down 18 USAF fighters and 29 bombers; the USAF shot down five KPAF fighters.[citation needed]
By August, the KPA had pushed back the ROK Army and the Eighth United States Army to the vicinity of Pusan, in southeast Korea.[40]:53 In their southward advance, the KPA purged the Republic of Korea's intelligentsia by killing civil servants and intellectuals.[40]:56 On 20 August, General MacArthur warned North Korean leader Kim Il-Sung that he was responsible for the KPA's atrocities.[40][73]:56 By September, the UN Command controlled only the Pusan perimeter, enclosing only about 10% of Korea, in a line partially defined by the Nakdong River.
Although Kim's early successes had led him to predict that he would end the war by the end of August, Chinese leaders were more pessimistic. To counter the possibility of American invasion, Zhou Enlai secured a Soviet commitment to have the USSR support Chinese forces with air cover, and deployed 260,000 soldiers along the Korean border, under the command of Gao Gang. Zhou commanded Chai Chengwen to conduct a topographical survey of Korea, and directed L