The Philosophy of History
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
With Prefaces by Charles Hegel
and the Translator, J. Sibree, M.A.
“The History of the World is not intelligible apart from a
Government of the World.” — W. V. Humboldt
	

Kitchener
2001
Batoche Books
52 Eby Street South
Kitchener, Ontario
N2G 3L1
Canada
email: batoche@gto.net
Table of Contents
Translator’s Introduction ........................................................ 5
Charles Hegel’s Preface ....................................................... 11
Introduction. ......................................................................... 14
Geographical Basis of History. ......................................... 96
Classification of Historic Data ........................................ 121
Part I: The Oriental World ................................................. 128
Section I: China .............................................................. 132
Section II: India .............................................................. 156
Section II. (Continued). India Buddhism. ..................... 185
Section II: Persia. ............................................................ 191
Chapter I. The Zend People ........................................ 194
Chapter II. The Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes, and
Persians. ................................................................... 200
Chapter III. The Persian Empire and its Constituent Parts.
................................................................................. 206
Persia ........................................................................ 207
Syria and the Semitic Western Asia ......................... 209
Judaea ...................................................................... 213
Egypt ........................................................................ 217
Transition to the Greek World ................................. 240
Part II: The Greek World ................................................... 243
Section I: The Elements of the Greek Spirit. .................. 245
Section II: Phases of Individuality Æsthetically Conditioned
........................................................................................ 258
Chapter I. The Subjective Work of Art ...................... 258
Chapter II. The Objective Work of Art ...................... 261
Chapter III. The Political Work of Art ....................... 268
The Wars with the Persians ...................................... 274
Athens ...................................................................... 277
Sparta ....................................................................... 280
The Peloponnesian War ........................................... 284
The Macedonian Empire .......................................... 290
Section III: The Fall of the Greek Spirit. ........................ 294
Part III: The Roman World ................................................ 296
Section I: Rome to the Time of the Second Punic War. .. 301
Chapter I. — The Elements of the Roman Spirit ......... 301
Chapter II. — The History of Rome to the Second Punic War
..................................................................................... 314
Section II: Rome from the Second Punic War to the Emperors
........................................................................................ 324
Section III: ..................................................................... 332
Chapter I. Rome Under the Emperors. ....................... 332
Chapter II. Christianity. ............................................... 337
Chapter III. The Byzantine Empire. ............................ 353
Part IV: The German World. .............................................. 358
Section I: The Elements of the Christian German World.
........................................................................................ 364
Chapter I. The Barbarian Migrations. .......................... 364
Chapter II Mohametanism. ......................................... 372
Chapter III. The Empire of Charlemagne. ................... 377
Section II: The Middle Ages ........................................... 383
Chapter I. The Feudality and the Hierarchy. .............. 383
Chapter II. The Crusades. ............................................ 407
Chapter III. The Transition from Feudalism to Monarchy.
..................................................................................... 417
Art and Science as Putting a Period to the Middle Ages
................................................................................. 427
Section III: The Modern Time. ....................................... 430
Chapter I. The Reformation ......................................... 431
Chapter II. Influence of the Reformation on Political
Development. ........................................................... 446
Chapter III. The Éclaircissement and Revolution ........ 458
Notes .................................................................................. 477
Translator’s Introduction
Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of History are recognized
in Germany as a popular introduction to his system; their form is
less rigid than the generality of metaphysical treatises, and the
illustrations, which occupy a large proportion of the work, are
drawn from a field of observation more familiar perhaps, than
any other, to those who have not devoted much time to
metaphysical studies. One great value of the work is that it
presents the leading facts of history from an altogether novel
point of view. And when it is considered that the writings of
Hegel have exercised a marked influence on the political
movements of Germany, it will be admitted that his theory of the
universe, especially that part which bears directly upon politics,
deserves attention even from those who are the most exclusive
advocates of the “practical.”
A writer who has established his claim to be regarded as an
authority, by the life which he has infused into metaphysical
abstractions, has pronounced the work before us, “one of the
pleasantest books on the subject he ever read.”1
And compared with that of most German writers, even the
style may claim to be called vigorous and pointed. If therefore in
its English dress the “Philosophy of History“ should be found
deficient in this respect, the fault must not be attributed to the
original.
It has been the aim of the translator to present his author to the
public in a really English form, even at the cost of a
circumlocution which must sometimes do injustice to the merits
of the original. A few words however have necessarily been used
in a rather unusual sense; and one of them is of very frequent
occurrence. The German “Geist,” in Hegel’s nomenclature,
includes both intelligence and will, the latter even more
expressly than the former. It embraces in fact man’s entire
mental and moral being, and a little reflection will make it
obvious that no term in our metaphysical vocabulary could have
been well substituted for the more theological one, “Spirit,” as a
fair equivalent. It is indeed only the impersonal and abstract use
of the term that is open to objection; an objection which can be
met by an appeal to the best classical usage; viz., the rendering
of the Hebrew  and Greek  in the authorized version
of the Scriptures. One indisputable instance may suffice in
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 6
confirmation: “Their horses [i.e., of the Egyptians] are flesh and
not spirit.” (Isaiah xxxi. 3.) It is pertinent to remark here, that the
comparative disuse of this term in English metaphysical
literature, is one result of that alienation of theology from
philosophy with which continental writers of the most opposite
schools agree in taxing the speculative genius of Britain — an
alienation which mainly accounts for the gulf separating English
from German speculation, and which will, it is feared, on other
accounts also be the occasion of communicating a somewhat
uninviting aspect to the following pages.
The distinction which the Germans make between
“Sittlichkeit” and “Moralität,” has presented another difficulty.
The former denotes conventional morality, the latter that of the
heart or conscience. Where no ambiguity was likely to arise, both
terms have been translated “morality.” In other cases a stricter
rendering has been given, modified by the requirements of the
context. The word “moment” is, as readers of German
philosophy are aware, a veritable crux to the translator. In Mr. J.
R. Morell’s very valuable edition of Johnson’s Translation of
Tennemann’s “Manual of the History of Philosophy,” the
following explanation is given: “This term was borrowed from
mechanics by Hegel (see his “Wissenschaft der Logik,” Vol. 3,
P. 104, Ed. 1841). He employs it to denote the contending forces
which are mutually dependent, and whose contradiction forms an
equation. Hence his formula, Esse = Nothing. Here Esse and
Nothing are momentums, giving birth to Werden, i.e., Existence.
Thus the momentum contributes to the same oneness of
operation in contradictory forces that we see in mechanics,
amidst contrast and diversity, in weight and distance, in the case
of the balance.” But in several parts of the work before us this
definition is not strictly adhered to, and the translator believes he
has done justice to the original in rendering the word by
“successive” or “organic phase.” In the chapter on the Crusades
another term occurs which could not be simply rendered into
English. The definite, positive, and present embodiment of
essential being is there spoken of as “ein Dieses,” “das Dieses,”
etc., literally “a This,” “the This,” for which repulsive
combination a periphrasis has been substituted, which, it is
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 7
believed, is not only accurate but expository. Paraphrastic
additions, however, have been, in fairness to the reader, enclosed
in brackets [ ]; and the philosophical appropriation of ordinary
terms is generally indicated by capitals, e.g., “Spirit,”
“Freedom,” “State,” “Nature,” etc.
The limits of a brief preface preclude an attempt to explain the
Hegelian method in its wider applications; and such an
undertaking is rendered altogether unnecessary by the facilities
which are afforded by works so very accessible as the translation
of Tennemann above mentioned, Chalybseus’s “Historical
Development of Speculative Philosophy, from Kant to Hegel,”
Blakey’s “History of the Philosophy of Mind,” Mr. Lewes’s
“Biographical History of Philosophy,” besides treatises devoted
more particularly to the Hegelian philosophy. Among these latter
may be fairly mentioned the work of a French professor, M.
Vera, “Introduction à la Philosophie de Hegel,” a lucid and
earnest exposition of the system at large; and the very able
summary of Hegel’s “Philosophy of Right,” by T. C. Sandars,
late fellow of Oriel College, which forms one of the series of
“Oxford Essays” for 1855, and which bears directly on the
subject of the present volume.
It may, nevertheless, be of some service to the reader to
indicate the point of view from which this “Philosophy of
History” is composed, and to explain the leading idea.
The aim and scope of that civilizing process which all hopeful
thinkers recognize in history, is the attainment of Rational
Freedom. But the very term freedom supposes a previous
bondage; and the question naturally arises: “Bondage to what?”
— A superficial inquirer may be satisfied with an answer
referring it to the physical power of the ruling body. Such a
response was deemed satisfactory by a large number of political
speculators in the last century, and even at the beginning of the
present; and it is one of the great merits of an influential thinker
of our days to have expelled this idolum fori, which had also
become an idolum theatri, from its undue position; and to have
revived the simple truth that all stable organizations of men, all
religious and political communities, are based upon principles
which are far beyond the control of the One or the Many. And in
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 8
these principles or some phase of them every man in every clime
and age is born, lives and moves. The only question is: Whence
are those principles derived? Whence spring those primary
beliefs or superstitions, religious and political, that hold society
together? They are no inventions of “priestcraft” or “kingcraft,”
for to them priestcraft and kingcraft owe their power. They are
no results of a Contrat Social, for with them society originates.
Nor are they the mere suggestions of man’s weakness, prompting
him to propitiate the powers of nature, in furtherance of his
finite, earthborn desires. Some of the phenomena of the religious
systems that have prevailed in the world might seem thus
explicable; but the Nihilism of more than one Oriental creed, the
suicidal strivings of the Hindoo devotee to become absorbed in
a divinity recognized as a pure negation, cannot be reduced to so
gross a formula; while the political superstition that ascribes a
divine right to the feebleness of a woman or an infant is
altogether untouched by it. Nothing is left therefore but to
recognize them as “fancies,” “delusions,” “dreams,” the results
of man’s vain imagination — to class them with the other
absurdities with which the abortive past of humanity is by some
thought to be only too replete; or, on the other hand, to regard
them as the rudimentary teachings of that essential intelligence
in which man’s intellectual and moral life originates. With Hegel
they are the objective manifestation of infinite reason — the first
promptings of Him who having “made of one blood all nations
of men for to dwell on the face of the earth, hath determined the
times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, if
haply they might feel after and find him” — 	   
. And it is these  , these determined
and organic epochs in the history of the world that Hegel
proposes to distinguish and develop in the following treatise.
Whatever view may be entertained as to the origin or
importance of those elementary principles, and by whatever
general name they may be called — Spontaneous, Primary, or
Objective Intelligence — it seems demonstrable that it is in some
sense or other to its own belief, its own reason or essential being,
that imperfect humanity is in bondage; while the perfection of
social existence is commonly regarded as a deliverance from that
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 9
bondage. In the Hegelian system, this paradoxical condition is
regarded as one phase of that antithesis which is presented in all
spheres of existence, between the subjective and the objective,
but which it is the result of the natural and intellectual processes
that constitute the life of the universe, to annul by merging into
one absolute existence. And however startling this theory may be
as applied to other departments of nature and intelligence, it
appears to be no unreasonable formula for the course of
civilization, and which is substantially as follows: In less
cultivated nations, political and moral restrictions are looked
upon as objectively posited; the constitution of society, like the
world of natural objects, is regarded as something into which a
man is inevitably born; and the individual feels himself bound to
comply with requirements of whose justice or propriety he is not
allowed to judge, though they often severely test his endurance,
and even demand the sacrifice of his life. In a state of high
civilization, on the contrary, though an equal self-sacrifice be
called for, it is in respect of laws and institutions which are felt
to be just and desirable. This change of relation may, without any
very extraordinary use of terms, or extravagance of speculative
conceit, be designated the harmonization or reconciliation of
objective and subjective intelligence. The successive phases
which humanity has assumed in passing from that primitive state
of bondage to this condition of rational freedom form the chief
subject of the following lectures.
The mental and moral condition of individuals and their social
and religious conditions (the subjective and objective
manifestations of reason) exhibit a strict correspondence with
each other in every grade of progress. “They that make them are
like unto them,” is as true of religious and political ideas as of
religious and political idols. Where man sets no value on that
part of his mental and moral life which makes him superior to the
brutes, brute life will be an object of worship and bestial
sensuality will be the genius of the ritual. Where mere inaction
is the finis bonorum, absorption in nothingness will be the aim of
the devotee. Where, on the contrary, active and vigorous virtue
is recognized as constituting the real value of man — where
subjective spirit has learned to assert its own freedom, both
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 10
against irrational and unjust requirements from without, and
caprice, passion, and sensuality, from within, it will demand a
living, acting, just, and holy, embodiment of Deity as the only
possible object of its adoration. In the same degree, political
principles also will be affected. Where mere nature
predominates, no legal relations will be acknowledged but those
based on natural distinction; rights will be inexorably associated
with “caste.” Where, on the other hand, spirit has attained its
freedom, it will require a code of laws and political constitution,
in which the rational subordination of nature to reason that
prevails in its own being, and the strength it feels to resist
sensual seductions shall be distinctly mirrored.
Between the lowest and highest grades of intelligence and will,
there are several intervening stages, around which a complex of
derivative ideas, and of institutions, arts, and sciences, in
harmony with them, are aggregated. Each of these aggregates has
acquired a name in history as a distinct nationality. Where the
distinctive principle is losing its vigor, as the result of the
expansive force of mind of which it was only the temporary
embodiment, the national life declines, and we have the
transition to a higher grade, in which a comparatively abstract
and limited phase of subjective intelligence and will — to which
corresponds an equally imperfect phase of objective reason — is
exchanged for one more concrete, and vigorous — one which
develops human capabilities more freely and fully, and in which
right is more adequately comprehended.
The goal of this contention is, as already indicated, the selfrealization,
the complete development of spirit, whose proper
nature is freedom — freedom in both senses of the term, i.e.
liberation from outward control — inasmuch as the law to which
it submits has its own explicit sanction — and emancipation
from the inward slavery of lust and passion.
The above remarks are not designed to afford anything like a
complete or systematic analysis of Hegel’s “Philosophy of
History,” but simply to indicate its leading conception, and if
possible to contribute something towards removing a prejudice
against it on the score of its resolving facts into mystical
paradoxes, or attempting to construe them à priori. In applying
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 11
the theory, some facts may not improbably have been distorted,
some brought into undue prominence, and others altogether
neglected. In the most cautious and limited analysis of the past,
failures and perversions of this kind are inevitable: and a
comprehensive view of history is proportionately open to
mistake. But it is another question whether the principles applied
in this work to explain the course which civilization has
followed, are a correct inference from historical facts, and afford
a reliable clue to the explanation of their leading aspects. The
translator would remark, in conclusion, that the “Introduction”
will probably be found the most tedious and difficult part of the
treatise; he would therefore suggest a cursory reading of it in the
first instance, and a second perusal as a resume of principles
which are more completely illustrated in the body of the work.
J. Sibree.
Charles Hegel’s Preface
The changed form in which Hegel’s lectures on the Philosophy
of History are re-issued, suggests the necessity of some
explanation respecting the relation of this second edition both to
the original materials from which the work was compiled, and to
their first publication.
The lamented Professor Gans, the editor of the “Philosophy of
History,” displayed a talented ingenuity in transforming lectures
into a book; in doing so he followed for the most part Hegel’s
latest deliveries of the course, because they were the most
popular, and appeared most adapted to his object.
He succeeded in presenting the lectures much as they were
delivered in the winter of 1830–31; and this result might be
regarded as perfectly satisfactory, if Hegel’s various readings of
the course had been more uniform and concordant, if indeed they
had not rather been of such a nature as to supplement each other.
For however great may have been Hegel’s power of condensing
the wide extent of the phenomenal world by thought, it was
impossible for him entirely to master and to present in a uniform
shape the immeasurable material of history in the course of one
semester. In the first delivery in the winter of 1822–23, he was
chiefly occupied with unfolding the philosophical idea, and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 12
showing how this constitutes the real kernel of history, and the
impelling soul of world-historical peoples. In proceeding to treat
of China and India, he wished, as he said himself, only to show
by example how philosophy ought to comprehend the character
of a nation; and this could be done more easily in the case of the
stationary nations of the East, than in that of peoples which have
a bona, fide history and a historical development of character. A
warm predilection made him linger long with the Greeks, for
whom he always felt a youthful enthusiasm; and after a brief
consideration of the Roman World he endeavored finally to
condense the Mediaeval Period and the Modern Time into a few
lectures; for time pressed, and when, as in the Christian World,
the thought no longer lies concealed among the multitude of
phenomena, but announces itself and is obviously present in
history, the philosopher is at liberty to abridge his discussion of
it; in fact, nothing more is needed than to indicate the impelling
idea. In the later readings, on the other hand, China, India, and
the East generally were more speedily despatched, and more time
and attention devoted to the German World. By degrees the
philosophical and abstract occupied less space, the historical
matter was expanded, and the whole became more popular.
It is easy to see how the different readings of the course
supplement each other, and how the entire substance cannot be
gathered without uniting the philosophical element which
predominates in the earlier, and which must constitute the basis
of the work, with the historical expansion which characterizes
the latest deliveries.
Had Hegel pursued the plan which most professors adopt, in
adapting notes for use in the lecture room, of merely appending
emendations and additions to the original draught, it would be
correct to suppose that his latest readings would be also the most
matured. But as, on the contrary, every delivery was with him a
new act of thought, each gives only the expression of that degree
of philosophical energy which animates his mind at the time;
thus, in fact, the two first deliveries of 1822–23 and 1824–25,
exhibit a far more comprehensive vigor of idea and expression,
a far richer store of striking thoughts and appropriate images,
than those of later date; for that first inspiration which
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 13
accompanied the thoughts when they first sprang into existence,
could only lose its living freshness by repetition.
From what has been said, the nature of the task which a new
edition involved is sufficiently manifest. A treasury of thought
of no trifling value had to be recovered from the first readings,
and the tone of originality restored to the whole. The printed text
therefore was made the basis, and the work of inserting,
supplementing, substituting, and transforming (as the case
seemed to require), was undertaken with the greatest possible
respect for the original. No scope was left for the individual
views of the editor, since in all such alterations Hegel’s
manuscripts were the sole guide. For while the first publication
of these lectures — a part of the introduction excepted —
followed the notes of the hearers only, the second edition has
endeavored to supplement it by making Hegel’s own manuscripts
the basis throughout, and using the notes only for the purpose of
rectification and arrangement. The editor has striven after
uniformity of tone through the whole work simply by allowing
the author to speak everywhere in his own words; so that not
only are the new insertions taken verbatim from the manuscripts,
but even where the printed text was retained in the main, peculiar
expressions which the hearer had lost in transcription, were
restored.
For the benefit of those who place vigor of thought in a formal
schematism, and with polemical zeal assert its exclusive claim
against other styles of philosophizing, the remark may be added
that Hegel adhered so little to the subdivisions which he had
adopted, that he made some alterations in them on occasion of
every reading of the course — treated Buddhism and Lamaism,
e.g., sometimes before, sometimes after India, sometimes
reduced the Christian World more closely to the German nations,
sometimes took in the Byzantine Empire, and so on. The new
edition has had but few alterations to make in this respect.
When the association for publishing Hegel’s works did me the
honor to intrust me with the re-editing of my father’s
“Philosophy of History,” it also named as advocates of the
claims of the first edition, and as representatives of Professor
Gans, who had been removed from its circle by death, three of its
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 14
members, Geh. Ober-Regierungs Rath Dr. Schulze, Professor
von Henning, and Professor Hotho, to whose revision the work
in its new shape was to be submitted. In this revision, I not only
enjoyed the acquiescence of those most estimable men and
valued friends in the alterations I had made, but also owe them
a debt of thanks for many new emendations, which I take the
opportunity of thus publicly discharging.
In conclusion, I feel constrained to acknowledge that my
gratitude to that highly respected association for the praiseworthy
deed of love to science, friendship, and disinterestedness, whose
prosecution originated it and still holds it together, could be
increased only by the fact of its having granted me also a share
in editing the works of my beloved father.
Charles Hegel.
Philosophy of History.
Introduction.
The subject of this course of Lectures is the Philosophical
History of the World. And by this must be understood, not a
collection of general observations respecting it, suggested by the
study of its records, and proposed to be illustrated by its facts,
but Universal History itself.2 To gain a clear idea, at the outset,
of the nature of our task, it seems necessary to begin with an
examination of the other methods of treating History. The
various methods may be ranged under three heads:
I. Original History.
II. Reflective History.
III. Philosophical History.
I. Of the first kind, the mention of one or two distinguished
names will furnish a definite type. To this category belong
Herodotus, Thucydides, and other historians of the same order,
whose descriptions are for the most part limited to deeds, events,
and states of society, which they had before their eyes, and
whose spirit they shared. They simply transferred what was
passing in the world around them, to the realm of representative
intellect. An external phenomenon is thus translated into an
internal conception. In the same way the poet operates upon the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 15
material supplied him by his emotions; projecting it into an
image for the conceptive faculty. These original historians did,
it is true, find statements and narratives of other men ready to
hand. One person cannot be an eye or ear witness of everything.
But they make use of such aids only as the poet does of that
heritage of an already-formed language, to which he owes so
much: merely as an ingredient. Historiographers bind together
the fleeting elements of story, and treasure them up for
immortality in the Temple of Mnemosyne. Legends, Balladstories,
Traditions, must be excluded from such original history.
These are but dim and hazy forms of historical apprehension, and
therefore belong to nations whose intelligence is but half
awakened. Here, on the contrary, we have to do with people fully
conscious of what they were and what they were about. The
domain of reality — actually seen, or capable of being so —
affords a very different basis in point of firmness from that
fugitive and shadowy element, in which were engendered those
legends and poetic dreams whose historical prestige vanishes, as
soon as nations have attained a mature individuality.
Such original historians, then, change the events, the deeds,
and the states of society with which they are conversant, into an
object for the conceptive faculty. The narratives they leave us
cannot, therefore, be very comprehensive in their range.
Herodotus, Thucydides, Guicciardini, may be taken as fair
samples of the class in this respect. What is present and living in
their environment is their proper material. The influences that
have formed the writer are identical with those which have
moulded the events that constitute the matter of his story. The
author’s spirit, and that of the actions he narrates, is one and the
same. He describes scenes in which he himself has been an actor,
or at any rate an interested spectator. It is short periods of time,
individual shapes of persons and occurrences, single, unreflected
traits, of which he makes his picture. And his aim is nothing
more than the presentation to posterity of an image of events as
clear as that which he himself possessed in virtue of personal
observation, or life-like descriptions. Reflections are none of his
business, for he lives in the spirit of his subject; he has not
attained an elevation above it. If, as in Caesar’s case, he belongs
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 16
to the exalted rank of generals or statesmen, it is the prosecution
of his own aims that constitutes the history.
Such speeches as we find in Thucydides (for example) of
which we can positively assert that they are not bona fide reports,
would seem to make against out statement that a historian of his
class presents us no reflected picture; that persons and people
appear in his works in propria persona. Speeches, it must be
allowed, are veritable transactions in the human commonwealth;
in fact, very gravely influential transactions. It is indeed, often
said, “Such and such things are only talk;” by way of
demonstrating their harmlessness. That for which this excuse is
brought may be mere “talk”; and talk enjoys the important
privilege of being harmless. But addresses of peoples to peoples,
or orations directed to nations and to princes, are integrant
constituents of history. Granted that such orations as those of
Pericles — that most profoundly accomplished, genuine, noble
statesman — were elaborated by Thucydides, it must yet be
maintained that they were not foreign to the character of the
speaker. In the orations in question, these men proclaim the
maxims adopted by their countrymen, and which formed their
own character; they record their views of their political relations,
and of their moral and spiritual nature; and the principles of their
designs and conduct. What the historian puts into their mouths is
no supposititious system of ideas, but an uncorrupted transcript
of their intellectual and moral habitudes.
Of these historians, whom we must make thoroughly our own,
with whom we must linger long, if we would live with their
respective nations, and enter deeply into their spirit: of these
historians, to whose pages we may turn not for the purposes of
erudition merely, but with a view to deep and genuine
enjoyment, there are fewer than might be imagined. Herodotus
the Father, i.e., the Founder of History, and Thucydides have
been already mentioned. Xenophon’s Retreat of the Ten
Thousand, is a work equally original. Caesar’s Commentaries are
the simple masterpiece of a mighty spirit. Among the ancients,
these annalists were necessarily great captains and statesmen. In
the Middle Ages, if we except the Bishops, who were placed in
the very centre of the political world, the Monks monopolize this
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 17
category as naive chroniclers who were as decidedly isolated
from active life as those elder annalists had been connected with
it. In modern times the relations are entirely altered. Our culture
is essentially comprehensive, and immediately changes all events
into historical representations. Belonging to the class in question,
we have vivid, simple, clear narrations — especially of military
transactions — which might fairly take their place with those of
Caesar. In richness of matter and fulness of detail as regards
strategic appliances, and attendant circumstances, they are even
more instructive. The French “Mémoires,” also, fall under this
category. In many cases these are written by men of mark,
though relating to affairs of little note. They not unfrequently
contain a large proportion of anecdotal matter, so that the ground
they occupy is narrow and trivial. Yet they are often veritable
masterpieces in history; as those of Cardinal de Retz, which in
fact trench on a larger historical field. In Germany such masters
are rare. Frederick the Great (“Histoire de Mon Temps”) is an
illustrious exception. Writers of this order must occupy an
elevated position. Only from such a position is it possible to take
an extensive view of affairs — to see everything. This is out of
the question for him, who from below merely gets a glimpse of
the great world through a miserable cranny.
II. The second kind of history we may call the reflective. It is
history whose mode of representation is not really confined by
the limits of the time to which it relates, but whose spirit
transcends the present. In this second order a strongly marked
variety of species may be distinguished.
I. It is the aim of the investigator to gain a view of the entire
history of a people or a country, or of the world, in short, what
we call Universal History. In this case the working up of the
historical material is the main point. The workman approaches
his task with his own spirit; a spirit distinct from that of the
element he is to manipulate. Here a very important consideration
will be the principles to which the author refers the bearing and
motives of the actions and events which he describes, and those
which determine the form of his narrative. Among us Germans
this reflective treatment and the display of ingenuity which it
occasions assume a manifold variety of phases. Every writer of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 18
history proposes to himself an original method. The English and
French confess to general principles of historical composition.
Their standpoint is more that of cosmopolitan or of national
culture. Among us each labors to invent a purely individual point
of view. Instead of writing history, we are always beating our
brains to discover how history ought to be written. This first kind
of Reflective History is most nearly akin to the preceding, when
it has no farther aim than to present the annals of a country
complete. Such compilations (among which may be reckoned the
works of Livy, Diodorus Siculus, Johannes von Müller’s History
of Switzerland) are, if well performed, highly meritorious.
Among the best of the kind may be reckoned such annalists as
approach those of the first class; who give so vivid a transcript
of events that the reader may well fancy himself listening to
contemporaries and eye- witnesses. But it often happens that the
individuality of tone which must characterize a writer belonging
to a different culture is not modified in accordance with the
periods such a record must traverse. The spirit of the writer is
quite other than that of the times of which he treats. Thus Livy
puts into the mouths of the old Roman kings, consuls, and
generals such orations as would be delivered by an accomplished
advocate of the Livian era, and which strikingly contrast with the
genuine traditions of Roman antiquity (e.g., the fable of
Menenius Agrippa). In the same way he gives us descriptions of
battles, as if he had been an actual spectator; but whose features
would serve well enough for battles in any period, and whose
distinctness contrasts on the other hand with the want of
connection and the inconsistency that prevail elsewhere, even in
his treatment of chief points of interest. The difference between
such a compiler and an original historian may be best seen by
comparing Polybius himself with the style in which Livy uses,
expands, and abridges his annals in those periods of which
Polybius’s account has been preserved. Johannes von Müller has
given a stiff, formal, pedantic aspect to his history, in the
endeavor to remain faithful in his portraiture to the times he
describes. We much prefer the narratives we find in old Tschudy.
All is more naive and natural than it appears in the garb of a
fictitious and affected archaism.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 19
A history which aspires to traverse long periods of time, or to
be universal, must indeed forego the attempt to give individual
representations of the past as it actually existed. It must
foreshorten its pictures by abstractions; and this includes not
merely the omission of events and deeds, but whatever is
involved in the fact that Thought is, after all, the most trenchant
epitomist. A battle, a great victory, a siege, no longer maintains
its original proportions, but is put off with a bare mention. When
Livy, e.g., tells us of the wars with the Volsci, we sometimes
have the brief announcement: “This year war was carried on with
the Volsci.”
2. A second species of Reflective History is what we may call
the Pragmatical. When we have to deal with the Past, and
occupy ourselves with a remote world, a Present rises into being
for the mind — produced by its own activity, as the reward of its
labor. The occurrences are, indeed, various; but the idea which
pervades them — their deeper import and connection — is one.
This takes the occurrence out of the category of the Past and
makes it virtually Present. Pragmatical (didactic) reflections,
though in their nature decidedly abstract, are truly and
indefeasibly of the Present, and quicken the annals of the dead
Past with the life of to-day. Whether, indeed, such reflections are
truly interesting and enlivening, depends on the writer’s own
spirit. Moral reflections must here be specially noticed — the
moral teaching expected from history; which latter has not
infrequently been treated with a direct view to the former. It may
be allowed that examples of virtue elevate the soul, and are
applicable in the moral instruction of children for impressing
excellence upon their minds. But the destinies of peoples and
states, their interests, relations, and the complicated tissue of
their affairs, present quite another field. Rulers, Statesmen,
Nations, are wont to be emphatically commended to the teaching
which experience offers in history. But what experience and
history teach is this — that peoples and governments never have
learned anything from history, or acted on principles deduced
from it. Each period is involved in such peculiar circumstances,
exhibits a condition of things so strictly idiosyncratic, that its
conduct must be regulated by considerations connected with
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 20
itself, and itself alone. Amid the pressure of great events, a
general principle gives no help. It is useless to revert to similar
circumstances in the Past. The pallid shades of memory struggle
in vain with the life and freedom of the Present. Looked at in this
light, nothing can be shallower than the oft-repeated appeal to
Greek and Roman examples during the French Revolution.
Nothing is more diverse than the genius of those nations and that
of our times. Johannes v. Müller, in his “Universal History,” as
also in his “History of Switzerland,” had such moral aims in
view. He designed to prepare a body of political doctrines for the
instruction of princes, governments, and peoples (he formed a
special collection of doctrines and reflections — frequently
giving us in his correspondence the exact number of
apophthegms which he had compiled in a week); but he cannot
reckon this part of his labor as among the best that he
accomplished. It is only a thorough, liberal, comprehensive view
of historical relations (such e.g., as we find in Montesquieu’s
“Esprit des Lois”) that can give truth and interest to reflections
of this order. One Reflective History, therefore, supersedes
another. The materials are patent to every writer: each is likely
enough to believe himself capable of arranging and manipulating
them; and we may expect that each will insist upon his own spirit
as that of the age in question. Disgusted by such reflective
histories, readers have often returned with pleasure to a narrative
adopting no particular point of view. These certainly have their
value; but for the most part they offer only material for history.
We Germans are content with such. The French, on the other
hand, display great genius in reanimating bygone times, and in
bringing the past to bear upon the present condition of things.
3. The third form of Reflective History is the Critical. This
deserves mention as pre-eminently the mode of treating history
now current in Germany. It is not history itself that is here
presented. We might more properly designate it as a History of
History; a criticism of historical narratives and an investigation
of their truth and credibility. Its peculiarity in point of fact and of
intention, consists in the acuteness with which the writer extorts
something from the records which was not in the matters
recorded. The French have given us much that is profound and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 21
judicious in this class of composition. But they have not
endeavored to pass a merely critical procedure for substantial
history. They have duly presented their judgments in the form of
critical treatises. Among us, the so-called “higher criticism,”
which reigns supreme in the domain of philology, has also taken
possession of our historical literature. This “higher criticism” has
been the pretext for introducing all the anti-historical
monstrosities that a vain imagination could suggest. Here we
have the other method of making the past a living reality; putting
subjective fancies in the place of historical data; fancies whose
merit is measured by their boldness, that is, the scantiness of the
particulars on which they are based, and the peremptoriness with
which they contravene the best established facts of history.
4. The last species of Reflective History announces its
fragmentary character on the very face of it. It adopts an abstract
position; yet, since it takes general points of view (e.g., as the
History of Art, of Law, of Religion), it forms a transition to the
Philosophical History of the World. In our time this form of the
history of ideas has been more developed and brought into
notice. Such branches of national life stand in close relation to
the entire complex of a people’s annals; and the question of chief
importance in relation to our subject is, whether the connection
of the whole is exhibited in its truth and reality, or referred to
merely external relations. In the latter case, these important
phenomena (Art, Law, Religion, etc.) appear as purely accidental
national peculiarities. It must be remarked that, when Reflective
History has advanced to the adoption of general points of view,
if the position taken is a true one, these are found to constitute —
not a merely external thread, a superficial series — but are the
inward guiding soul of the occurrences and actions that occupy
a nation’s annals. For, like the soul-conductor Mercury, the Idea
is in truth, the leader of peoples and of the World; and Spirit, the
rational and necessitated will of that conductor, is and has been
the director of the events of the World’s History. To become
acquainted with Spirit in this its office of guidance, is the object
of our present undertaking. This brings us to
III. The third kind of history — the Philosophical. No
explanation was needed of the two previous classes; their nature
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 22
was self-evident. It is otherwise with this last, which certainly
seems to require an exposition or justification. The most general
definition that can be given, is, that the Philosophy of History
means nothing but the thoughtful consideration of it. Thought is,
indeed, essential to humanity. It is this that distinguishes us from
the brutes. In sensation, cognition, and intellection; in our
instincts and volitions, as far as they are truly human, Thought is
an invariable element. To insist upon Thought in this connection
with history may, however, appear unsatisfactory. In this science
it would seem as if Thought must be subordinate to what is
given, to the realities of fact; that this is its basis and guide: while
Philosophy dwells in the region of self-produced ideas, without
reference to actuality. Approaching history thus prepossessed,
Speculation might be expected to treat it as a mere passive
material; and, so far from leaving it in its native truth, to force it
into conformity with a tyrannous idea, and to construe it, as the
phrase is, “à priori.” But as it is the business of history simply to
adopt into its records what is and has been — actual occurrences
and transactions; and since it remains true to its character in
proportion as it strictly adheres to its data, we seem to have in
Philosophy, a process diametrically opposed to that of the
historiographer. This contradiction, and the charge consequently
brought against speculation, shall be explained and confuted. We
do not, however, propose to correct the innumerable special
misrepresentations, trite or novel, that are current respecting the
aims, the interests, and the modes of treating history, and its
relation to Philosophy.
The only Thought which Philosophy brings with it to the
contemplation of History, is the simple conception of Reason;
that Reason is the Sovereign of the World; that the history of the
world, therefore, presents us with a rational process. This
conviction and intuition is a hypothesis in the domain of history
as such. In that of Philosophy it is no hypothesis. It is there
proved by speculative cognition, that Reason — and this term
may here suffice us, without investigating the relation sustained
by the Universe to the Divine Being — is Substance, as well as
Infinite Power; its own Infinite Material underlying all the
natural and spiritual life which it originates, as also the Infinite
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 23
Form — that which sets this Material in motion. On the one
hand, Reason is the substance of the Universe; viz., that by
which and in which all reality has its being and subsistence. On
the other hand, it is the Infinite Energy of the Universe; since
Reason is not so powerless as to be incapable of producing
anything but a mere ideal, a mere intention — having its place
outside reality, nobody knows where; something separate and
abstract, in the heads of certain human beings. It is the infinite
complex of things, their entire Essence and Truth. It is its own
material which it commits to its own Active Energy to work up;
not needing, as finite action does, the conditions of an external
material of given means from which it may obtain its support,
and the objects of its activity. It supplies its own nourishment,
and is the object of its own operations. While it is exclusively its
own basis of existence, and absolute final aim, it is also the
energizing power realizing this aim; developing it not only in the
phenomena of the Natural, but also of the Spiritual Universe —
the History of the World. That this “Idea” or “Reason” is the
True, the Eternal, the absolutely powerful essence; that it reveals
itself in the World, and that in that World nothing else is
revealed but this and its honor and glory — is the thesis which,
as we have said, has been proved in Philosophy, and is here
regarded as demonstrated.
religionIsis and that of Mithra had been extended through the whole
Roman World; Spirit, lost in the outward and in limited aims,
yearned after an Infinite. But the West desired a deeper, purely
inward Universality — an Infinite possessed at the same time of
positive qualities. Again, it was in Egypt — in Alexandria, viz.,
they have thus bestowed upon us a valuable gift, in point of form,
we can use and enjoy it without becoming victims to that sterile
Understanding — without regarding it as the ne plus ultra of
Wisdom and Reason. They were its victims, living beneath its
sway; but they thereby secured for others Freedom of Spirit —
viz., that inward Freedom which has consequently become
To the constrained, non-spiritual, and unfeeling intelligence of
the Roman world we owe the origin and the development of
positive law. For we saw above, how in the East, relations in
their very nature belonging to the sphere of outward or inward
morality, were made legal mandates; even among the Greeks,
morality was at the same time juristic right, and on that very
account the constitution was entirely dependent on morals and
disposition, and had not yet a fixity of principle within it, to
counterbalance the mutability of men’s inner life and individual
subjectivity. The Romans then completed this important
separation, and discovered a principle of right, which is external
— i.e. one not dependent on disposition and sentiment. While
