embodiment of the Infinite to contemplate, and does not lavish
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 428
its devotion on a mere Thing, but on the higher element with
which the material object is imbued — that expressive form with
which Spirit has invested it. — It is one thing for the mind to
have before it a mere Thing — such as the Host per se, a piece
of stone or wood, or a wretched daub; — quite another thing for
it to contemplate a painting, rich in thought and sentiment, or a
beautiful work of sculpture, in looking at which, soul holds
converse with soul and Spirit with Spirit. In the former case,
Spirit is torn from its proper element, bound down to something
utterly alien to it — the Sensuous, the Non-Spiritual. In the latter,
on the contrary, the sensuous object is a beautiful one, and the
Spiritual Form with which it is endued, gives it a soul and
contains truth in itself. But on the one hand, this element of truth
as thus exhibited, is manifested only in a sensuous mode, not in
its appropriate form; on the other hand, while Religion normally
involves independence of that which is essentially a mere
outward and material object — a mere thing — that kind of
religion which is now under consideration, finds no satisfaction
in being brought into connection with the Beautiful: the coarsest,
ugliest, poorest representations will suit its purpose equally well
— perhaps better. Accordingly real masterpieces — e.g.
Raphael’s Madonnas — do not enjoy distinguished veneration,
or elicit a multitude of offerings: inferior pictures seem on the
contrary to be especial favorites and to be made the object of the
warmest devotion and the most generous liberality. Piety passes
by the former for this very reason, that were it to linger in their
vicinity it would feel an inward stimulus and attraction; — an
excitement of a kind which cannot but be felt to be alien, where
all that is desiderated is a sense of mental bondage in which self
is lost — the stupor of abject dependence. — Thus Art in its very
nature transcended the principle of the Church. But as the former
manifests itself only under sensuous limitations [and does not
present the suspicious aspect of abstract thought], it is at first
regarded as a harmless and indifferent matter. The Church,
therefore, continued to follow it; but as soon as the free Spirit in
which Art originated, advanced to Thought and Science, a
separation ensued.
For Art received a further support and experienced an elevating
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 429
influence as the result of the study of antiquity (the name
humaniora is very expressive, for in those works of antiquity
honor is done to the Human and to the development of
Humanity) : through this study the West became acquainted with
the true and eternal element in the activity of man. The outward
occasion of this revival of science was the fall of the Byzantine
Empire. Large numbers of Greeks took refuge in the West and
introduced Greek literature there; and they brought with them not
only the knowledge of the Greek language but also the treasures
to which that knowledge was the key. Very little of Greek
literature had been preserved in the convents, and an
acquaintance with the language could scarcely be said to exist at
all. With the Roman literature it was otherwise ; in regard to that,
ancient traditions still lingered: Virgil was thought to be a great
magician (in Dante he appears as the guide in Hell and
Purgatory). Through the influence of the Greeks, then, attention
was again directed to the ancient Greek literature; the West had
become capable of enjoying and appreciating it; quite other
ideals and a different order of virtue from that with which
mediaeval Europe was familiar were here presented; an
altogether novel standard for judging of what was to be honored,
commended and imitated was set up. The Greeks in their works
exhibited quite other moral commands than those with which the
West was acquainted; scholastic formalism had to make way for
a body of speculative thought of a widely different complexion:
Plato became known in the West, and in him a new human world
presented itself. These novel ideas met with a principal organ of
diffusion in the newly discovered Art of Printing, which, like the
use of gunpowder, corresponds with modern character, and
supplied the desideratum of the age in which it was invented, by
tending to enable men to stand in an ideal connection with each
other. So far as the study of the ancients manifested an interest
in human deeds and virtues, the Church continued to tolerate it,
not observing that in those alien works an altogether alien spirit
was advancing to confront it,
As a third leading feature demanding our notice in determining
the character of the period, might be mentioned that urging of
Spirit outwards — that desire on the part of man to become
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 430
acquainted with his world. The chivalrous spirit of the maritime
heroes of Portugal and Spain opened a new way to the East
Indies and discovered America. This progressive step also,
involved no transgression of the limits of ecclesiastical principles
or feeling. The aim of Columbus was by no means a merely
secular one: it presented also a distinctly religious aspect; the
treasures of those rich Indian lands which awaited his discovery
were destined in his intention to be expended in a new Crusade,
and the heathen inhabitants of the countries themselves were to
be converted to Christianity. The recognition of the spherical
figure of the earth led man to perceive that it offered him a
definite and limited object, and navigation had been benefited by
the new found instrumentality of the magnet, enabling it to be
something better than mere coasting: thus technical appliances
make their appearance when a need for them is experienced.
These three events — the so-called Revival of Learning, the
flourishing of the Fine Arts and the discovery of America and of
the passage to India by the Cape — may be compared with that
blush of dawn, which after long storms first betokens the return
of a bright and glorious day. This day is the day of Universality,
which breaks upon the world after the long, eventful, and terrible
night of the Middle Ages — a day which is distinguished by
science, art and inventive impulse — that is, by the noblest and
highest, and which Humanity, rendered free by Christianity and
emancipated through the instrumentality of the Church, exhibits
as the eternal and veritable substance of its being.
Section III: The Modern Time.
We have now arrived at the third period of the German World,
and thus enter upon the period of Spirit conscious that it is free,
inasmuch as it wills the True, the Eternal — that which is in and
for itself Universal.
In this third period also, three divisions present themselves.
First, we have to consider the Reformation in itself — the allenlightening
Sun, following on that blush of dawn which we
observed at the termination of the mediaeval period; next, the
unfolding of that state of things which succeeded the
Reformation; and lastly, the Modern Times, dating from the end
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 431
of the last century.
Chapter I. The Reformation
The Reformation resulted from the corruption of the Church.
That corruption was not an accidental phenomenon; it was not
the mere abuse of power and dominion. A corrupt state of things
is very frequently represented as an “abuse”; it is taken for
granted that the foundation was good — the system, the
institution itself faultless — but that the passion, the subjective
interest, in short the arbitrary volition of men has made use of
that which in itself was good to further its own selfish ends, and
that all that is required to be done is to remove these adventitious
elements. On this showing the institute in question escapes
obloquy, and the evil that disfigures it appears something foreign
to it. But when accidental abuse of a good thing really occurs, it
is limited to particularity. A great and general corruption
affecting a body of such large and comprehensive scope as a
Church, is quite another thing. — The corruption of the Church
was a native growth; the principle of that corruption is to be
looked for in the fact that the specific and definite embodiment
of Deity which it recognizes, is sensuous — that the external in
a coarse material form, is enshrined in its inmost being. (The
refining transformation which Art supplied was not sufficient.)
The higher Spirit — that of the World — has already expelled
the Spiritual from it; it finds nothing to interest it in the Spiritual
or in occupation with it; thus it retains that specific and definite
embodiment; — i.e., we have the sensuous immediate
subjectivity, not refined by it to Spiritual subjectivity. —
Henceforth it occupies a position of inferiority to the World-
Spirit; the latter has already transcended it, for it has become
capable of recognizing the Sensuous as sensuous, the merely
outward as merely outward; it has learned to occupy itself with
the Finite in a finite way, and in this very activity to maintain an
independent and confident position as a valid and rightful
subjectivity.35
The element in question which is innate in the Ecclesiastical
principle only reveals itself as a corrupting one when the Church
has no longer any opposition to contend with — when it has
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 432
become firmly established. Then its elements are free to display
their tendencies without let or hindrance. Thus it is that
externality in the Church itself which becomes evil and
corruption, and develops itself as a negative principle in its own
bosom. — The forms which this corruption assumes are
coextensive with the relations which the Church itself sustains,
into which consequently this vitiating element enters.
The ecclesiastical piety of the period displays the very essence
of superstition — the fettering of the mind to a sensuous object,
a mere Thing — in the most various forms: — slavish deference
to Authority; for Spirit, having renounced its proper nature in its
most essential quality [having sacrificed its characteristic liberty
to a mere sensuous object], has lost its Freedom, and is held in
adamantine bondage to what is alien to itself; — a credulity of
the most absurd and childish character in regard to Miracles, for
the Divine is supposed to manifest itself in a perfectly
disconnected and limited way, for purely finite and particular
purposes; — lastly, lust of power, riotous debauchery, all the
forms of barbarous and vulgar corruption, hypocrisy and
deception — all this manifests itself in the Church; for in fact the
Sensuous in it is not subjugated and trained by the
Understanding; it has become free, but only in a rough and
barbarous way. — On the other hand the virtue which the Church
presents, since it is negative only in opposition to sensual
appetite, is but abstractly negative; it does not know how to
exercise a moral restraint In the indulgence of the senses; in
actual life nothing is left for it but avoidance, renunciation,
inactivity.
These contrasts which the Church exhibits — of barbarous vice
and lust on the one hand, and an elevation of soul that is ready to
renounce all worldly things, on the other hand — became still
wider in consequence of the energetic position which man is
sensible of occupying in his subjective power over outward and
material things in the natural world, in which he feels himself
free, and so gains for himself an absolute right. — The Church
whose office it is to save souls from perdition, makes this
salvation itself a mere external appliance, and is now degraded
so far as to perform this office in a merely external fashion. The
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 433
remission of sins — the highest satisfaction which the soul
craves, the certainty of its peace with God, that which concerns
man’s deepest and inmost nature — is offered to man in the most
grossly superficial and trivial fashion — to be purchased for
mere money; while the object of this sale is to procure means for
dissolute excess. One of the objects of this sale was indeed the
building of St. Peter’s, that magnificent chef-d’oeuvre of
Christian fabrics erected in the metropolis of religion. But, as
that paragon of works of art, the Athene and her temple-citadel
at Athens, was built with the money of the allies and issued in
the loss of both allies and power; so the completion of this
Church of St. Peter and Michael Angelo’s “Last Judgment” in
the Sistine Chapel, were the Doomsday and the ruin of this proud
spiritual edifice.
The time-honored and cherished sincerity of the German
people is destined to effect this revolution out of the honest truth
and simplicity of its heart. While the rest of the world are urging
their way to India, to America — straining every nerve to gain
wealth and to acquire a secular dominion which shall encompass
the globe, and on which the sun shall never set — we find a
simple Monk looking for that specific embodiment of Deity
which Christendom had formerly sought in an earthly sepulchre
of stone, rather in the deeper abyss of the Absolute Ideality of all
that is sensuous and external — in the Spirit and the Heart — the
heart, which, wounded unspeakably by the offer of the most
trivial and superficial appliances to satisfy the cravings of that
which is inmost and deepest, now detects the perversion of the
absolute relation of truth in its minutest features, and pursues it
to annihilation. Luther’s simple doctrine is that the specific
embodiment of Deity — infinite subjectivity, that is true
spirituality, Christ — is in no way present and actual in an
outward form, but as essentially spiritual is obtained only in
being reconciled to God — in faith and spiritual enjoyment.
These two words express everything. That which this doctrine
desiderates, is not the recognition of a sensuous object as God,
nor even of something merely conceived, and which is not actual
and present, but of a Reality that is not sensuous. This abrogation
of externality imports the reconstruction of all the doctrines, and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 434
the reform of all the superstition into which the Church
consistently wandered, and in which its spiritual life was
dissipated. This change especially, affects the doctrine of works;
for works include what may be performed under any mental
conditions — not necessarily in faith, in one’s own soul, but as
mere external observances prescribed by authority. Faith is by no
means a bare assurance respecting mere finite things — an
assurance which belongs only to limited mind — as e.g., the
belief that such or such a person existed and said this or that; or
that the Children of Israel passed dry-shod through the Red Sea
— or that the trumpets before the walls of Jericho produced as
powerful an impression as our cannons; for although nothing of
all this had been related to us, our knowledge of God would not
be the less complete. In fact it is not a belief in something that is
absent, past and gone, but the subjective assurance of the Eternal,
of Absolute Truth, the Truth of God. Concerning this assurance,
the Lutheran Church affirms that the Holy Spirit alone produces
it — i.e., that it is an assurance which the individual attains, not
in virtue of his particular idiosyncrasy, but of his essential being.
— The Lutheran doctrine therefore involves the entire substance
of Catholicism, with the exception of all that results from the
element of externality — as far as the Catholic Church insists
upon that externality. Luther therefore could not do otherwise
than refuse to yield an iota in regard to that doctrine of the
Eucharist in which the whole question is concentrated. Nor could
he concede to the Reformed [Calvinistic] Church, that Christ is
a mere commemoration, a mere reminiscence: in this respect his
view was rather in accordance with that of the Catholic Church,
viz. that Christ is an actual presence, though only in faith and in
Spirit. He maintained that the Spirit of Christ really fills the
human heart — that Christ therefore is not to be regarded as
merely a historical person, but that man sustains an immediate
relation to him in Spirit.
While, then, the individual knows that he is filled with the
Divine Spirit, all the relations that sprung from that vitiating
element of externality which we examined above, are ipso facto
abrogated: there is no longer a distinction between priests and
laymen; we no longer find one class in possession of the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 435
substance of the Truth, as of all the spiritual and temporal
treasures of the Church; but the heart — the emotional part of
man’s Spiritual nature — is recognized as that which can and
ought to come into possession of the Truth; and this subjectivity
is the common property of all mankind. Each has to accomplish
the work of reconciliation in his own soul. — Subjective Spirit
has to receive the Spirit of Truth into itself, and give it a dwelling
place there. Thus that absolute inwardness of soul which pertains
to religion itself, and Freedom in the Church are both secured.
Subjectivity therefore makes the objective purport of
Christianity, i.e. the doctrine of the Church, its own. In the
Lutheran Church the subjective feeling and the conviction of the
individual is regarded as equally necessary with the objective
side of Truth. Truth with Lutherans is not a finished and
completed thing; the subject himself must be imbued with Truth,
surrendering his particular being in exchange for the substantial
Truth, and making that Truth his own. Thus subjective Spirit
gains emancipation in the Truth, abnegates its particularity and
comes to itself in realizing the truth of its being. Thus Christian
Freedom is actualized. If Subjectivity be placed in feeling only,
without that objective side, we have the standpoint of the merely
Natural Will.
In the proclamation of these principles is unfurled the new, the
latest standard round which the peoples rally — the banner of
Free Spirit, independent, though finding its life in the Truth, and
enjoying independence only in it. This is the banner under which
we serve, and which we bear. Time, since that epoch, has had no
other work to do than the formal imbuing of the world with this
principle, in bringing the Reconciliation implicit [in Christianity]
into objective and explicit realization.
Culture is essentially concerned with Form; the work of
Culture is the production of the Form of Universality, which is
none other than Thought.36 Consequently Law, Property, Social
Morality, Government, Constitutions, etc., must be conformed to
general principles, in order that they may accord with the idea of
Free Will and be Rational. Thus only can the Spirit of Truth
manifest itself in Subjective Will — in the particular shapes
which the activity of the Will assumes. In virtue of that degree of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 436
intensity which Subjective Free Spirit has attained, elevating it
to the form of Universality, Objective Spirit attains
manifestation. This is the sense in which we must understand the
State to be based on Religion. States and Laws are nothing else
than Religion manifesting itself in the relations of the actual
world.
This is the essence of the Reformation: Man is in his very
nature destined to be free.
At its commencement, the Reformation concerned itself only
with particular aspects of the Catholic Church: Luther wished to
act in union with the whole Catholic world, and expressed a
desire that Councils should be convened. His theses found
supporters in every country. In answer to the charge brought
against Luther and the Protestants, of exaggeration — nay, even
of calumnious misrepresentation in their descriptions of the
corruption of the Church, we may refer to the statements of
Catholics themselves, bearing upon this point, and particularly
to those contained in the official documents of Ecclesiastical
Councils. But Luther’s onslaught, which was at first limited to
particular points, was soon extended to the doctrines of the
Church; and leaving individuals, he attacked institutions at large
— conventual life, the secular lordships of the bishops, etc. His
writings now controverted not merely isolated dicta of the Pope
and the Councils, but the very principle on which such a mode of
deciding points in dispute was based — in fact, the Authority of
the Church. Luther repudiated that authority, and set up in its
stead the Bible and the testimony of the Human Spirit. And it is
a fact of the weightiest import that the Bible has become the
basis of the Christian Church: henceforth each individual enjoys
the right of deriving instruction for himself from it, and of
directing his conscience in accordance with it. We see a vast
change in the principle by which man’s religious life is guided:
the whole system of Tradition, the whole fabric of the Church
becomes problematical, and its authority is subverted. Luther’s
translation of the Bible has been of incalculable value to the
German people. It has supplied them with a People’s Book, such
as no nation in the Catholic world can boast; for though the latter
have a vast number of minor productions in the shape of prayerG.
W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 437
books, they have no generally recognized and classical book for
popular instruction. In spite of this it has been made a question
in modern times whether it is judicious to place the Bible in the
hands of the People. Yet the few disadvantages thus entailed are
far more than counterbalanced by the incalculable benefits
thence accruing: narratives, which in their external shape might
be repellent to the heart and understanding, can be
discriminatingly treated by the religious sense, which, holding
fast the substantial truth, easily vanquishes any such difficulties.
And even if the books which have pretensions to the character of
People’s Books, were not so superficial as they are, they would
certainly fail in securing that respect which a book claiming such
a title ought to inspire in individuals. But to obviate this
difficulty is no easy matter, for even should a book adapted to
the purpose in every other respect be produced, every country
parson would have some fault to find with it, and think to better
it. In France the need of such a book has been very much felt;
great premiums have been offered with a view to obtaining one,
but, from the reason stated, without success. Moreover, the
existence of a People’s Book presupposes as its primary
condition an ability to read on the part of the People; an ability
which in Catholic countries is not very commonly to be met
with.
The denial of the Authority of the Church necessarily led to a
separation. The Council of Trent stereotyped the principles of
Catholicism, and made the restoration of concord impossible.
Leibnitz at a later time discussed with Bishop Bossuet the
question of the union of the Churches; but the Council of Trent
remains the insurmountable obstacle. The Churches became
hostile parties, for even in respect to secular arrangements a
striking difference manifested itself. In the non-Catholic
countries the conventual establishments and episcopal
foundations were broken up, and the rights of the then
proprietors ignored. Educational arrangements were altered; the
fasts and holy days were abolished. Thus there was also a secular
reform — a change affecting the state of things outside the
sphere of ecclesiastical relations: in many places a rebellion was
raised against the temporal authorities. In Münster the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 438
Anabaptists expelled the Bishop and established a government
of their own; and the peasants rose en masse to emancipate
themselves from the yoke of serfdom. But the world was not yet
ripe for a transformation of its political condition as a
consequence of ecclesiastical reformation. — The Catholic
Church also was essentially influenced by the Reformation: the
reins of discipline were drawn tighter, and the greatest occasions
of scandal, the most crying abuses were abated. Much of the
intellectual life of the age that lay outside its sphere, but with
which it had previously maintained friendly relations, it now
repudiated. The Church came to a dead stop — “hitherto and no
farther!” It severed itself from advancing Science, from
philosophy and humanistic literature; and an occasion was soon
offered of declaring its enmity to the scientific pursuits of the
period. The celebrated Copernicus had discovered that the earth
and the planets revolve round the sun, but the Church declared
against this addition to human knowledge. Galileo, who had
published a statement in the form of a dialogue of the evidence
for and against the Copernican discovery (declaring indeed his
own conviction of its truth), was obliged to crave pardon for the
offence on his knees. The Greek literature was not made the
basis of culture; education was intrusted to the Jesuits. Thus does
the Spirit of the Catholic world in general sink behind the Spirit
of the Age.
Here an important question solicits investigation: — why the
Reformation was limited to certain nations, and why it did not
permeate the whole Catholic world. The Reformation originated
in Germany, and struck firm root only in the purely German
nations; outside of Germany itself it established itself in
Scandinavia and England. But the Romanic and Sclavonic
nations kept decidedly aloof from it. Even South Germany has
only partially adopted the Reformation — a fact which is
consistent with the mingling of elements which is the general
characteristic of its nationality. In Swabia, Franconia, and the
Rhine countries there were many convents and bishoprics, as
also many free imperial towns; and the reception or rejection of
the Reformation very much depended on the influences which
these ecclesiastical and civil bodies respectively exercised ; for
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 439
we have already noticed that the Reformation was a change
influencing the political life of the age as well as its religious and
intellectual condition. We must further observe, that authority
has much greater weight in determining men’s opinions than
people are inclined to believe. There are certain fundamental
principles which men are in the habit of receiving on the strength
of authority; and it was mere authority which in the case of many
countries decided for or against the adoption of the Reformation.
In Austria, in Bavaria, in Bohemia, the Reformation had already
made great progress; and though it is commonly said that when
truth has once penetrated men’s souls, it cannot be rooted out
again, it was indisputably stifled in the countries in question, by
force of arms, by stratagem or persuasion. The Sclavonic nations
were agricultural. This condition of life brings with it the
relation of lord and serf. In agriculture the agency of nature
predominates; human industry and subjective activity are on the
whole less brought into play in this department of labor than
elsewhere. The Sclavonians therefore did not attain so quickly or
readily as other nations the fundamental sense of pure
individuality — the consciousness of Universality — that which
we designated above as “political power,” and could not share
the benefits of dawning freedom. — But the Romanic nations
also — Italy, Spain, Portugal, and in part France — were not
imbued with the Reformed doctrines. Physical force perhaps did
much to repress them; yet this alone would not be sufficient to
explain the fact, for when the Spirit of a Nation craves anything
no force can prevent its attaining the desired object: nor can it be
said that these nations were deficient in culture; on the contrary,
they were in advance of the Germans in this respect. It was rather
owing to the fundamental character of these nations, that they did
not adopt the Reformation. But what is this peculiarity of
character which hindered the attainment of Spiritual Freedom?
We answer: the pure inwardness of the German nation was the
proper soil for the emancipation of Spirit; the Romanic Nations,
on the contrary, have maintained in the very depth of their soul
— in their Spiritual Consciousness — the principle of
Disharmony:37 they are a product of the fusion of Roman and
German blood, and still retain the heterogeneity thence resulting.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 440
The German cannot deny that the French, the Italians, the
Spaniards, possess more determination of character — that they
pursue a settled aim (even though it have a fixed idea for its
object) with perfectly clear consciousness and the greatest
attention — that they carry out a plan with great circumspection,
and exhibit the greatest decision in regard to specific objects.
The French call the Germans entiers, “entire” — i.e., stubborn;
they are also strangers to the whimsical originality of the
English. The Englishman attaches his idea of liberty to the
special [as opposed to the general] ; he does not trouble himself
about the Understanding [logical inference], but on the contrary
feels himself so much the more at liberty, the more his course of
action or his license to act contravenes the Understanding — i.e.,
runs counter to [logical inferences or] general principles. On the
other hand, among the Romanic peoples we immediately
encounter that internal schism, that holding fast by an abstract
principle, and as the counterpart of this, an absence of the
Totality of Spirit and sentiment which we call “Heart”; there is
not that meditative introversion of the soul upon itself; — in their
inmost being they may be said to be alienated from themselves
[abstract principles carry them away]. With them the inner life
is a region whose depth they do not appreciate; for it is given
over “bodily” to particular [absorbing] interests, and the infinity
that belongs to Spirit is not to be looked for there. Their inmost
being is not their own. They leave it as an alien and indifferent
matter, and are glad to have its concerns settled for them by
another. That other to which they leave it is the Church. They
have indeed something to do with it themselves; but since that
which they have to do is not self-originated and self-prescribed,
not their very own, they are content to leave the affair to be
settled in a superficial way. “Eh bien,” said Napoleon, “we shall
go to mass again, and my good fellows will say: ‘That is the
word of command!’” This is the leading feature in the character
of these nations — the separation of the religious from the
secular interest, i.e., from the special interest of individuality;
and the ground of this separation lies in their inmost soul, which
has lost its independent entireness of being, its profoundest unity.
Catholicism does not claim the essential direction of the Secular;
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 441
religion remains an indifferent matter on the one side, while the
other side of life is dissociated from it, and occupies a sphere
exclusively its own. Cultivated Frenchmen therefore feel an
antipathy to Protestantism because it seems to them something
pedantic, dull, minutely captious in its morality; since it requires
that Spirit and Thought should be directly engaged in religion: in
attending mass and other ceremonies, on the contrary, no
exertion of thought is required, but an imposing sensuous
spectacle is presented to the eye, which does not make such a
demand on one’s attention as entirely to exclude a little chat,
while yet the duties of the occasion are not neglected.
We spoke above of the relation which the new doctrine
sustained to secular life, and now we have only to exhibit that
relation in detail. The development and advance of Spirit from
the time of the Reformation onwards consist in this, that Spirit,
having now gained the consciousness of its Freedom, through
that process of mediation which takes place between man and
God — that is, in the full recognition of the objective process as
the existence [the positive and definite manifestation] of the
Divine essence — now takes it up and follows it out in building
up the edifice of secular relations. That harmony [of Objective
and Subjective Will] which has resulted from the painful
struggles of History, involves the recognition of the Secular as
capable of being an embodiment of Truth; whereas it had been
formerly regarded as evil only, as incapable of Good — the latter
being considered essentially ultramundane. It is now perceived
that Morality and Justice in the State are also divine and
commanded by God, and that in point of substance there is
nothing higher or more sacred. One inference is that Marriage is
no longer deemed less holy than Celibacy. Luther took a wife to
show that he respected marriage, defying the calumnies to which
he exposed himself by such a step. It was his duty to do so, as it
was also to eat meat on Fridays; to prove that such things are
lawful and right, in opposition to the imagined superiority of
abstinence. The Family introduces man to community — to the
relation of interdependence in society; and this union is a moral
one: while on the other hand the monks, separated from the
sphere of social morality, formed as it were the standing army of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 442
the Pope, as the janizaries formed the basis of the Turkish power.
The marriage of the priests entails the disappearance of the
outward distinction between laity and clergy. — Moreover the
repudiation of work no longer earned the reputation of sanctity;
it was acknowledged to be more commendable for men to rise
from a state of dependence by activity, intelligence, and industry,
and make themselves independent. It is more consonant with
justice that he who has money should spend it even in luxuries,
than that he should give it away to idlers and beggars; for he
bestows it on an equal number of persons by so doing, and these
must at any rate have worked diligently for it. Industry, crafts
and trades now have their moral validity recognized, and the
obstacles to their prosperity which originated with the Church,
have vanished. For the Church had pronounced it a sin to lend
money on interest: but the necessity of so doing led to the direct
violation of her injunctions. The Lombards (a fact which
accounts for the use of the term “lombard” in French to denote
a loan-office), and particularly the House of Medici, advanced
money to princes in every part of Europe. The third point of
sanctity in the Catholic Church — blind obedience, was likewise
denuded of its false pretensions. Obedience to the laws of the
State, as the Rational element in volition and action, was made
the principle of human conduct. In this obedience man is free, for
all that is demanded is that the Particular should yield to the
General. Man himself has a conscience; consequently the
subjection required of him is a free allegiance. This involves the
possibility of a development of Reason and Freedom, and of their
introduction into human relations; and Reason and the Divine
commands are now synonymous. The Rational no longer meets
with contradiction on the part of the religious conscience; it is
permitted to develop itself in its own sphere without disturbance,
without being compelled to resort to force in defending itself
against an adverse power. But in the Catholic Church, that
adverse element is unconditionally sanctioned. Where the
Reformed doctrine prevails, princes may still be bad governors,
but they are no longer sanctioned and solicited thereto by the
promptings of their religious conscience. In the Catholic Church
on the contrary, it is nothing singular for the conscience to be
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 443
found in opposition to the laws of the State. Assassinations of
sovereigns, conspiracies against the state, and the like, have often
been supported and carried into execution by the priests.
This harmony between the State and the Church has now
attained immediate realization.38 We have, as yet, no
reconstruction of the State, of the system of jurisprudence, etc.,
for thought must first discover the essential principle of Right.
The Laws of Freedom had first to be expanded to a system as
deduced from an absolute principle of Right. Spirit does not
assume this complete form immediately after the Reformation;
it limits itself at first to direct and simple changes, as e.g., the
doing away with conventual establishments and episcopal
jurisdiction, etc. The reconciliation between God and the World
was limited in the first instance to an abstract form; it was not yet
expanded into a system by which the moral world could be
regulated.
In the first instance this reconciliation must take place in the
individual soul, must be realized by feeling; the individual must
gain the assurance that the Spirit dwells in him — that, in the
language of the Church, a brokenness of heart has been
experienced, and that Divine grace has entered into the heart thus
broken. By Nature man is not what he ought to be; only through
a transforming process does he arrive at truth. The general and
speculative aspect of the matter is just this — that the human
heart is not what it should be. It was then required of the
individual that he should know what he is in himself; that is, the
teaching of the Church insisted upon man’s becoming conscious
that he is evil. But the individual is evil only when the Natural
manifests itself in mere sensual desire — when an unrighteous
will presents itself in its untamed, untrained, violent shape; and
yet it is required that such a person should know that he is
depraved, and that the good Spirit dwells in him; in fact he is
required to have a direct consciousness of and to “experience”
that which was presented to him as a speculative and implicit
truth. The Reconciliation having, then, assumed this abstract
form, men tormented themselves with a view to force upon their
souls the consciousness of their sinfulness and to know
themselves as evil. The most simple souls, the most innocent
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 444
natures were accustomed in painful introspection to observe the
most secret workings of the heart, with a view to a rigid
examination of them. With this duty was conjoined that of an
entirely opposite description; it was required that man should
attain the consciousness that the good Spirit dwells in him —
that Divine Grace has found an entrance into his soul. In fact the
important distinction between the knowledge of abstract truth
and the knowledge of what has actual existence was left out of
sight. Men became the victims of a tormenting uncertainty as to
whether the good Spirit has an abode in them, and it was deemed
indispensable that the entire process of spiritual transformation
should become perceptible to the individual himself. An echo of
this self-tormenting process may still be traced in much of the
religious poetry of that time; the Psalms of David which exhibit
a similar character were then introduced as hymns into the ritual
of Protestant Churches. Protestantism took this turn of minute
and painful introspection, possessed with the conviction of the
importance of the exercise, and was for a long time characterized
by a self-tormenting disposition and an aspect of spiritual
wretchedness; which in the present day has induced many
persons to enter the Catholic pale, that they might exchange this
inward uncertainty for a formal broad certainty based on the
imposing totality of the Church. A more refined order of
reflection upon the character of human actions was introduced
into the Catholic Church also. The Jesuits analyzed the first
rudiments of volition (velleitas) with as painful minuteness as
was displayed in the pious exercises of Protestantism ; but they
had a science of casuistry which enabled them to discover a good
reason for everything, and so get rid of the burden of guilt which
this rigid investigation seemed to aggravate.
of Moors and heretics, soon assumed a political character, being
directed against the enemies of the State. Thus the Inquisition
confirmed the despotic power of the King: it claimed supremacy
even over bishops and archbishops, and could cite them before
its tribunal. The frequent confiscation of property — one of the
most customary penalties — tended to enrich the treasury of the
State. Moreover, the Inquisition was a tribunal which took
cognizance of mere suspicion; and while it consequently
exercised a fearful authority over the clergy, it had a peculiar
support in the national pride. For every Spaniard wished to be
considered Christian by descent, and this species of vanity fell in
with the views and tendency of the Inquisition. Particular
provinces of the Spanish monarchy, as e.g., Aragon, still retained
many peculiar rights and privileges; but the Spanish Kings from
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 449
Philip II downwards proceeded to suppress them altogether.
It would lead us too far to pursue in detail the process of the
depression of the aristocracy in the several states of Europe. The
main scope of this depressing process was, as already stated, the
curtailment of the private rights of the feudal nobility, and the
transformation of their seigneurial authority into an official
position in connection with the State. This change was in the
interest of both the King and the People. The powerful barons
seemed to constitute an intermediate body charged with the
defence of liberty; but properly speaking, it was only their own
privileges which they maintained against the royal power on the
one hand and the citizens on the other hand. The barons of
England extorted Magna Charta from the King; but the citizens
gained nothing by it, on the contrary they remained in their
former condition. Polish Liberty too, meant nothing more than
the freedom of the barons in contraposition to the King, the
nation being reduced to a state of absolute serfdom. When liberty
is mentioned, we must always be careful to observe whether it is
not really the assertion of private interests which is thereby
designated. For although the nobility were deprived of their
sovereign power, the people were still oppressed in consequence
of their absolute dependence, their serfdom, and subjection to
aristocratic jurisdiction; and they were partly declared utterly
incapable of possessing property, partly subjected to a condition
of bond-service which did not permit of their freely selling the
products of their industry. The supreme interest of emancipation
from this condition concerned the power of the State as well as
the subjects — that emancipation which now gave them as
citizens the character of free individuals, and determined that
what was to be performed for the Commonwealth should be a
matter of just allotment, not of mere chance. The aristocracy of
possession maintains that possession against both — viz., against
the power of the State at large and against individuals. But the
aristocracy have a position assigned them, as the support of the
throne, as occupied and active on behalf of the State and the
common weal, and at the same time as maintaining the freedom
of the citizens. This in fact is the prerogative of that class which
forms the link between the Sovereign and the People — to
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 450
undertake to discern and to give the first impulse to that which
is intrinsically Rational and Universal ; and this recognition of
and occupation with the Universal must take the place of positive
personal right. This subjection to the Head of the State of that
intermediate power which laid claim to positive authority was
now accomplished, but this did not involve the emancipation of
the subject class. This took place only at a later date, when the
idea of right in and for itself arose in men’s minds. Then the
sovereigns relying on their respective peoples, vanquished the
caste of unrighteousness; but where they united with the barons,
or where the latter maintained their freedom against the kings,
those positive rights or rather wrongs continued.
We observe also as an essential feature now first presenting
itself in the political aspect of the time, a connected system of
States and a relation of States to each other. They became
involved in various wars: the Kings having enlarged their
political authority, now turn their attention to foreign lands,
insisting upon claims of all kinds. The aim and real interest of
the wars of the period is invariably conquest.
Italy especially had become such an object of desire, and was
a prey to the rapacity of the French, the Spaniards, and at a later
date, of the Austrians. In fact absolute disintegration and
dismemberment has always been an essential feature in the
national character of the inhabitants of Italy, in ancient as well as
in modern times. Their stubborn individuality was exchanged for
a union the result of force, under the Roman dominion ; but as
soon as this bond was broken, the original character reappeared
in full strength. In later times, as if finding in them a bond of
union otherwise impossible — after having escaped from a
selfishness of the most monstrous order and which displayed its
perverse nature in crimes of every description — the Italians
attained a taste for the Fine Arts: thus their civilization, the
mitigation of their selfishness, reached only the Grade of Beauty,
not that of Rationality — the higher unity of Thought.
Consequently, even in poetry and song the Italian nature is
different from ours. Improvisation characterizes the genius of the
Italians; they pour out their very souls in Art and the ecstatic
enjoyment of it. Enjoying a naturel so imbued with Art, the State
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 451
must be an affair of comparative indifference, a merely casual
matter to the Italians. But we have to observe also that the wars
in which Germany engaged, were not particularly honorable to
it: it allowed Burgundy, Lorraine, Alsace, and other parts of the
empire to be wrested from it. From these wars between the
various political powers there arose common interests, and the
object of that community of interest was the maintenance of
severalty — the preservation to the several States of their
independence — in fact the “balance of power.” The motive to
this was of a decidedly “practical” kind, viz., the protection of
the several States from conquest. The union of the States of
Europe as the means of shielding individual States from the
violence of the powerful — the preservation of the balance of
power, had now taken the place of that general aim of the elder
time, the defence of Christendom, whose centre was the Papacy.
This new political motive was necessarily accompanied by a
diplomatic condition — one in which all the members of the
great European system, however distant, felt an interest in that
which happened to any one of them. Diplomatic policy had been
brought to the greatest refinement in Italy, and was thence
transmitted to Europe at large. Several princes in succession
seemed to threaten the stability of the balance of power in
Europe. When this combination of States was just commencing,
Charles V was aiming at universal monarchy; for he was
Emperor of Germany and King of Spain to boot: the Netherlands
and Italy acknowledged his sway, and the whole wealth of
America flowed into his coffers. With this enormous power,
which, like the contingencies of fortune in the case of private
property, had been accumulated by the most felicitous
combinations of political dexterity — among other things by
marriage, — but which was destitute of an internal and reliable
bond, he was nevertheless unable to gain any advantage over
France, or even over the German princes; nay he was even
compelled to a peace by Maurice of Saxony. His whole life was
spent in suppressing disturbances in all parts of his empire and
in conducting foreign wars. The balance of power in Europe was
similarly threatened by Louis XIV. Through that depression of
the grandees of his kingdom which Richelieu and after him
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 452
Mazarin had accomplished, he had become an absolute
sovereign. France, too, had the consciousness of its intellectual
superiority in a refinement of culture surpassing anything of
which the rest of Europe could boast. The pretensions of Louis
were founded not on extent of dominion, (as was the case with
Charles V) so much as on that culture which distinguished his
people, and which at that time made its way everywhere with the
language that embodied it, and was the object of universal
admiration: they could therefore plead a higher justification than
those of the German Emperor. But the very rock on which the
vast military resources of Philip II had already foundered — the
heroic resistance of the Dutch — proved fatal also to the
ambitious schemes of Louis. Charles XII also presented a
remarkably menacing aspect; but his ambition had a Quixotic
tinge and was less sustained by intrinsic vigor. Through all these
storms the nations of Europe succeeded in maintaining their
individuality and independence. An external relation in which the
States of Europe had an interest in common, was that sustained
to the Turks — the terrible power which threatened to overwhelm
Europe from the East. The Turks of that day had still a sound and
vigorous nationality, whose power was based on conquest, and
which was therefore engaged in constant warfare, or at least
admitted only a temporary suspension of arms. As was the case
among the Franks, the conquered territories were divided among
their warriors as personal, not heritable possessions; when in
later times the principle of hereditary succession was adopted,
the national vigor was shattered. The flower of the Osman force,
the Janizaries, were the terror of the Europeans. Their ranks were
