superior to the Secular. The Emperor at his coronation — a
ceremony which only the Pope could perform — was obliged to
promise upon oath that he would always be obedient to the Pope
and the Church. Whole countries and states, such as Naples,
Portugal, England and Ireland came into a formal relation of
vassalage to the Papal chair.
Thus the Church attained an independent position: the Bishops
convoked synods in the various countries, and in these
convocations the clergy found a permanent centre of unity and
support. In this way the Church attained the most influential
position in secular affairs. It arrogated to itself the award of
princely crowns, and assumed the part of mediator between
sovereign powers in war and peace. The contingencies which
particularly favored such interventions on the part of the Church
were the marriages of princes. It frequently happened that
princes wished to be divorced from their wives; but for such a
step they needed the permission of the Church. The latter did not
let slip the opportunity of insisting upon the fulfilment of
demands that might have been otherwise urged in vain, and
thence advanced till it had obtained universal influence. In the
chaotic state of the community generally, the intervention of the
authority of the Church was felt as a necessity. By the
introduction of the “Truce of God,” feuds and private revenge
were suspended for at least certain days in the week, or even for
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 394
entire weeks; and the Church maintained this armistice by the
use of all its ghostly appliances of excommunication, interdict
and other threats and penalties. The secular possessions of the
Church brought it however into a relation to other secular princes
and lords, which was alien to its proper nature; it constituted a
formidable secular power in contraposition to them, and thus
formed in the first instance a centre of opposition against
violence and arbitrary wrong. It withstood especially the attacks
upon the ecclesiastical foundations — the secular lordships of
the Bishops; and on occasion of opposition on the part of vassals
to the violence and caprice of princes, the former had the support
of the Pope. But in these proceedings the Church brought to bear
against opponents only a force and arbitrary resolve of the same
kind as their own, and mixed up its secular interest with its
interest as an ecclesiastical, i.e., a divinely substantial power.
Sovereigns and peoples were by no means incapable of
discriminating between the two, or of recognizing the worldly
aims that were apt to intrude as motives for ecclesiastical
intervention. They therefore stood by the Church as far as they
deemed it their interest to do so; otherwise they showed no great
dread of excommunication or other ghostly terrors. Italy was the
country where the authority of the Popes was least respected; and
the worst usage they experienced was from the Romans
themselves. Thus what the Popes acquired in point of land and
wealth and direct sovereignty, they lost in influence and
consideration.
We have then to probe to its depths the spiritual element in the
Church — the form of its power. The essence of the Christian
principle has already been unfolded; it is the principle of
Mediation. Man realizes his Spiritual essence only when he
conquers the Natural that attaches to him. This conquest is
possible only on the supposition that the human and the divine
nature are essentially one, and that Man, so far as he is Spirit,
also possesses the essentiality and substantiality that belong to
the idea of Deity. The condition of the mediation in question is
the consciousness of this unity; and the intuition of this unity was
given to man in Christ. The object to be attained is therefore, that
man should lay hold on this consciousness, and that it should be
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 395
continually excited in him. This was the design of the Mass: in
the Host Christ is set forth as actually, present; the piece of bread
consecrated by the priest is the present God, subjected to human
contemplation and ever and anon offered up. One feature of this
representation is correct, inasmuch as the sacrifice of Christ is
here regarded as an actual and eternal transaction, Christ being
not a mere sensuous and single, but a completely universal, i.e.,
divine, individuum; but on the other hand it involves the error of
isolating the sensuous phase; for the Host is adored even apart
from its being partaken of by the faithful, and the presence of
Christ is not exclusively limited mental vision and Spirit. Justly
therefore did the Lutheran Reformation make this dogma an
especial object of attack. Luther proclaimed the great doctrine
that the Host had spiritual value and Christ was received only on
the condition of faith in him; apart from this, the Host, he
affirmed, was a mere external thing, possessed of no greater
value than any other thing. But the Catholic falls down before the
Host; and thus the merely outward has sanctity ascribed to it. The
Holy as a mere thing has the character of externality; thus it is
capable of being taken possession of by another to my exclusion:
it may come into an alien hand, since the process of
appropriating it is not one that takes place in Spirit, but is
conditioned by its quality as an external object [Dingheit]. The
highest of human blessings is in the hands of others. Here arises
ipso facto a separation between those who possess this blessing
and those who have to receive it from others — between the
Clergy and the Laity. The laity as such are alien to the Divine.
This is the absolute schism in which the Church in the Middle
Ages was involved: it arose from the recognition of the Holy as
something external. The clergy imposed certain conditions, to
which the laity must conform if they would be partakers of the
Holy. The entire development of doctrine, spiritual insight and
the knowledge of divine things, belonged exclusively to the
Church: it has to ordain, and the laity have simply to believe:
obedience is their duty — the obedience of faith, without insight
on their part. This position of things rendered faith a matter of
external legislation, and resulted in compulsion and the stake.
The generality of men are thus cut off from the Church; and on
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 396
the same principle they are severed from the Holy in every form.
For on the same principle as that by which the clergy are the
medium between man on the one hand and God and Christ on the
other hand, the layman cannot directly apply to the Divine Being
in his prayers, but only through mediators — human beings who
conciliate God for him, the Dead, the Perfect — Saints. Thus
originated the adoration of the Saints, and with it that
conglomerate of fables and falsities with which the Saints and
their biographies have been invested. In the East the worship of
images had early become popular, and after a lengthened
struggle had triumphantly established itself: — an image, a
picture, though sensuous, still appeals rather to the imagination;
but the coarser natures of the West desired something more
immediate as the object of their contemplation, and thus arose
the worship of relics. The consequence was a formal resurrection
of the dead in the mediaeval period, every pious Christian
wished to be in possession of such sacred earthly remains.
Among the Saints the chief object of adoration was the Virgin
Mary. She is certainly the beautiful concept of pure love — a
mother’s love; but Spirit and Thought stand higher than even
this; and in the worship of this conception that of God in Spirit
was lost, and Christ himself was set aside. The element of
mediation between God and man was thus apprehended and held
as something external. Thus through the perversion of the
principle of Freedom, absolute Slavery became the established
law. The other aspects and relations of the spiritual life of Europe
during this period flow from this principle. Knowledge,
comprehension of religious doctrine, is something of which
Spirit is judged incapable; it is the exclusive possession of a
class, which has to determine the True. For man may not
presume to stand in a direct relation to God; so that, as we said
before, if he would apply to Him, he needs a mediator — a Saint.
This view imports the denial of the essential unity of the Divine
and Human; since man, as such, is declared incapable of
recognizing the Divine and of approaching thereto. And while
humanity is thus separated from the Supreme Good, no change
of heart, as such, is insisted upon — for this would suppose that
the unity of the Divine and the Human is to be found in man
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 397
himself — but the terrors of Hell are exhibited to man in the
most terrible colors, to induce him to escape from them, not by
moral amendment, but in virtue of something external — the
“means of grace.” These, however, are an arcanum to the laity;
another — the “Confessor,” must furnish him with them. The
individual has to confess — is bound to expose all the particulars
of his life and conduct to the view of the Confessor — and then
is informed what course he has to pursue to attain spiritual
safety. Thus the Church took the place of Conscience: it put men
in leading strings like children, and told them that man could not
be freed from the torments which his sins had merited, by any
amendment of his own moral condition, but by outward actions,
opera operata — actions which were not the promptings of his
own good-will, but performed by command of the ministers of
the church; e.g., hearing mass, doing penance, going through a
certain number of prayers, undertaking pilgrimages — actions
which are unspiritual, stupefy the soul, and which are not only
mere external ceremonies, but are such as can be even
vicariously performed, The supererogatory works ascribed to the
saints, could be purchased, and the spiritual advantage which
they merited, secured to the purchaser. Thus was produced an
utter derangement of all that is recognized as good and moral in
the Christian Church: only external requirements are insisted
upon, and these can be complied with in a merely external way.
A condition the very reverse of Freedom is intruded into the
principle of freedom itself.
With this perversion is connected the absolute separation of the
spiritual from the secular principle generally. There are two
Divine Kingdoms — the intellectual in the heart and cognitive
faculty, and the socially ethical whose element and sphere is
secular existence. It is science alone that can comprehend the
kingdom of God and the socially Moral world as one Idea, and
that recognizes the fact that the course of Time has witnessed a
process ever tending to the realization of this unity. But Piety [or
Religious Feeling] as such, has nothing to do with the Secular:
it may make its appearance in that sphere on a mission of mercy,
but this stops short of a strict socially ethical connection with it
— does not come up to the idea of Freedom. Religious Feeling
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 398
is extraneous to History, and has no History; for History is rather
the Empire of Spirit recognizing itself in its Subjective Freedom,
as the economy of social morality [sittliches Reich] in the State.
In the Middle Ages that embodying of the Divine in actual life
was wanting; the antithesis was not harmonized. Social morality
was represented as worthless, and that in its three most essential
particulars.
One phase of social morality is that connected with Love —
with the emotions called forth in the marriage relation. It is not
proper to say that Celibacy is contrary to Nature, but that it is
adverse to Social Morality [Sittlichkeit]. Marriage was indeed
reckoned by the Church among the Sacraments; but
notwithstanding the position thus assigned it, it was degraded,
inasmuch as celibacy was reckoned as the more holy state. A
second point of social morality is presented in Activity — the
workman has to perform for his subsistence. His dignity consists
in his depending entirely on his diligence, conduct, and
intelligence, for the supply of his wants. In direct contravention
of this principle, Pauperism, laziness, inactivity, was regarded as
nobler: and the Immoral thus received the stamp of consecration.
A third point of morality is, that obedience be rendered to the
Moral and Rational, as an obedience to laws which I recognize
as just; that it be not that blind and unconditional compliance
which does not know what it is doing, and whose course of
action is a mere groping about without clear consciousness or
intelligence. But it was exactly this latter kind of obedience that
passed for the most pleasing to God; a doctrine that exalts the
obedience of Slavery, imposed by the arbitrary will of the
Church, above the true obedience of Freedom.
In this way the three vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience
turned out the very opposite of what they assumed to be, and in
them all social morality was degraded. The Church was no
longer a spiritual power, but an ecclesiastical one; and the
relation which the secular world sustained to it was unspiritual,
automatic, and destitute of independent insight and conviction.
As the consequence of this, we see everywhere vice, utter
absence of respect for conscience, shamelessness, and a
distracted state of things, of which the entire history of the period
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 399
is the picture in detail.
According to the above, the Church of the Middle Ages
exhibits itself as a manifold Self- contradiction. For Subjective
Spirit, although testifying of the Absolute, is at the same time
limited and definitely existing Spirit, as Intelligence and Will. Its
limitation begins in its taking up this distinctive position, and
here consentaneously begins its contradictory and self-alienated
phase; for that intelligence and will are not imbued with the
Truth, which appears in relation to them as something given
[posited ab extra]. This externality of the Absolute Object of
comprehension affects the consciousness thus: — that the
Absolute Object presents itself as a merely sensuous, external
thing — common outward existence — and yet claims to be
Absolute: in the mediaeval view of things this absolute demand
is made upon Spirit. The second form of the contradiction in
question has to do with the relation which the Church itself
sustains. The true Spirit exists in man — is his Spirit; and the
individual gives himself the certainty of this identity with the
Absolute, in worship — the Church sustaining merely the
relation of a teacher and directress of this worship. But here, on
the contrary, we have an ecclesiastical body, like the Brahmins
in India, in possession of the Truth — not indeed by birth, but in
virtue of knowledge, teaching and training — yet with the
proviso that this alone is not sufficient, an external form, an
unspiritual title being judged essential to actual possession. This
outward form is Ordination, whose nature is such that the
consecration imparted inheres essentially like a sensuous quality
in the individual, whatever be the character of his soul — be he
irreligious, immoral, or absolutely ignorant. The third kind of
contradiction is the Church itself, in its acquisition as an outward
existence, of possessions and an enormous property — state of
things which, since that Church despises or professes to despise
riches, is none other than a Lie.
And we found the State, during the mediaeval period, similarly
involved in contradictions. We spoke above of an imperial rule,
recognized as standing by the side of the Church and constituting
its secular arm. But the power thus acknowledged is invalidated
by the fact that the imperial dignity in question is an empty title,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 400
not regarded by the Emperor himself or by those who wish to
make him the instrument of their ambitious views, as conferring
solid authority on its possessor; for passion and physical force
assume an independent position, and own no subjection to that
merely abstract conception. But secondly, the bond of union
which holds the Mediaeval State together, and which we call
Fidelity, is left to the arbitrary choice of men’s disposition
[Gemüth] which recognizes no objective duties. Consequently,
this Fidelity is the most unfaithful thing possible. German Honor
in the Middle Ages has become a proverb; but examined more
closely as History exhibits it we find it a veritable Punica fides
or Groeca fides; for the princes and vassals of the Emperor are
true and honorable only to their selfish aims, individual
advantage and passions, but utterly untrue to the Empire and the
Emperor; because in “Fidelity” in the abstract, their subjective
caprice receives a sanction, and the State is not organized as a
moral totality. A third contradiction presents itself in the
character of individuals, exhibiting, as they do on the one hand,
piety — religious devotion, the most beautiful in outward aspect,
and springing from the very depths of sincerity — and on the
other hand a barbarous deficiency in point of intelligence and
will. We find an acquaintance with abstract Truth, and yet the
most uncultured, the rudest ideas of the Secular and the Spiritual:
a truculent delirium of passion and yet a Christian sanctity which
renounces all that is worldly, and devotes itself entirely to
holiness. So self-contradictory, so deceptive is this mediaeval
period ; and the polemical zeal with which its excellence is
contended for, is one of the absurdities of our times. Primitive
barbarism, rudeness of manners, and childish fancy are not
revolting; they simply excite our pity. But the highest purity of
soul defiled by the most horrible barbarity; the Truth, of which
a knowledge has been acquired, degraded to a mere tool by
falsehood and self-seeking; that which is most irrational, coarse
and vile, established and strengthened by the religious sentiment
— this is the most disgusting and revolting spectacle that was
ever witnessed, and which only Philosophy can comprehend and
so justify. For such an antithesis must arise in man’s
consciousness of the Holy while this consciousness still remains
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 401
primitive and immediate; and the profounder the truth to which
Spirit comes into an implicit relation — while it has not vet
become aware of its own presence in that profound truth — so
much the more alien is it to itself in this its unknown form: but
only as the result of this alienation does it attain its true
harmonization.
We have then contemplated the Church as the reaction of the
Spiritual against the secular life of the time; but this reaction is
so conditioned, that it only subjects to itself that against which it
reacts — does not reform it. While the Spiritual, repudiating its
proper sphere of action, has been acquiring secular power, a
secular sovereignty has also consolidated itself and attained a
systematic development — the Feudal System. As through their
isolation, men are reduced to a dependence on their individual
power and might, every point in the world on which a human
being can maintain his ground becomes an energetic one. While
the Individual still remains destitute of the defence of laws and
is protected only by his own exertion, life, activity and
excitement everywhere manifest themselves. As men are certain
of eternal salvation through the instrumentality of the Church,
and to this end are bound to obey it only in its spiritual
requirements, their ardor in the pursuit of worldly enjoyment
increases, on the other hand, in inverse proportion to their fear of
its producing any detriment to their spiritual weal; for the Church
bestows indulgences, when required, for oppressive, violent and
vicious actions of all kinds.
The period from the eleventh to the thirteenth century
witnessed the rise of an impulse which developed itself in
various forms. The inhabitants of various districts began to build
enormous churches — Cathedrals, erected to contain the whole
community. Architecture is always the first art, forming the
inorganic phase, the domiciliation of the divinity; not till this is
accomplished does Art attempt to exhibit to the worshippers the
divinity himself — the Objective. Maritime commerce was
carried on with vigor by the cities on the Italian, Spanish, and
Flemish coasts, and this stimulated the productive industry of
their citizens at home. The Sciences began in some degree to
revive: the Scholastic Philosophy was in its glory. Schools for
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 402
the study of law were founded at Bologna and other places, as
hero of the North of glorious memory — played a part which
was so much the more brilliant inasmuch as it began to wage war
with the vast force of the Catholics, alone — without the help of
the Protestant states of the Empire. The powers of Europe, with
a few exceptions, precipitate themselves on Germany — flowing
back towards it as to the fountain from which they had originally
issued, and where now the right of inwardness that has come to
manifest itself in the sphere of religion, and that of internal
independence and severalty is to be fought out. The struggle ends
without an Ideal result — without having attained the
consciousness of a principle as an intellectual concept — in the
exhaustion of all parties, in a scene of utter desolation, where all
the contending forces have been wrecked; it issues in letting
parties simply take their course and maintain their existence on
the basis of external power. The issue is in fact exclusively of a
political nature.
In England also, war was indispensable to the establishment of
the Protestant Church: the struggle was in this case directed
against the sovereigns, who were secretly attached to
Catholicism because they found the principle of absolute sway
confirmed by its doctrines. The fanaticized people rebelled
against the assumption of absolute sovereign power — importing
that Kings are responsible to God alone (i.e., to the Father
Confessor) — and in opposition to Catholic externality, unfurled
the banner of extreme subjectivity in Puritanism — a principle
which, developing itself in the real world, presents an aspect
partly of enthusiastic elevation, partly of ridiculous incongruity.
The enthusiasts of England, like those of Münster, were for
having the State governed directly by the fear of God; the
soldiery sharing the same fanatical views prayed while they
fought for the cause they had espoused. But a military leader
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 455
now has the physical force of the country and consequently the
government in his hands: for in the State there must be
government, and Cromwell knew what governing is. He,
therefore, made himself ruler, and sent that praying parliament
about their business. With his death however his right to
authority vanished also, and the old dynasty regained possession
of the throne. Catholicism, we may observe, is commended to
the support of princes as promoting the security of their
government — a position supposed to be particularly manifest if
the Inquisition be connected with the government; the former
constituting the bulwark of the latter. But such a security is based
on a slavish religious obedience, and is limited to those grades of
human development in which the political constitution and the
whole legal system still rest on the basis of actual positive
possession; but if the constitution and laws are to be founded on
a veritable eternal Right, then security is to be found only in the
Protestant religion, in whose principle Rational Subjective
Freedom also attains development. The Dutch too offered a
vigorous opposition to the Catholic principle as bound up with
the Spanish sovereignty. Belgium was still attached to the
Catholic religion and remained subject to Spain: on the contrary,
the northern part of the Netherlands — Holland — stood its
ground with heroic valor against its oppressors. The trading
class, the guilds and companies of marksmen formed a militia
whose heroic courage was more than a match for the then
famous Spanish infantry. Just as the Swiss peasants had resisted
the chivalry of Austria, so here the trading cities held out against
disciplined troops. During this struggle on the Continent itself,
the Dutch fitted out fleets and deprived the Spaniards of part of
their colonial possessions, from which all their wealth was
derived. As independence was secured to Holland in its holding
to the Protestant principle, so that of Poland was lost through its
endeavor to suppress that principle in the case of dissidents.
Through the Peace of Westphalia the Protestant Church had
been acknowledged as an independent one — to the great
confusion and humiliation of Catholicism. This peace has often
passed for the palladium of Germany, as having established its
political constitution. But this constitution was in fact a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 456
confirmation of the particular rights of the countries into which
Germany had been broken up. It involves no thought, no
conception of the proper aim of a state. We should consult
“Hippolytus à lapide” (a book which, written before the
conclusion of the peace, had a great influence on the condition
of the Empire) if we would become acquainted with the character
of that German freedom of which so much is made. In the peace
in question the establishment of a complete particularity, the
determination of all relations on the principle of private right is
the object manifestly contemplated — a constituted anarchy,
such as the world had never before seen; — i.e., the position that
an Empire is properly a unity, a totality, a state, while yet all
relations are determined so exclusively on the principle of private
right that the privilege of all the constituent parts of that Empire
to act for themselves contrarily to the interest of the whole, or to
neglect that which its interest demands and which is even
required by law — is guaranteed and secured by the most
inviolable sanctions. Immediately after this settlement, it was
shown what the German Empire was as a state in relation to
other states: it waged ignominious wars with the Turks, for
deliverance from whom Vienna was indebted to Poland. Still
more ignominious was its relation to France, which took
possession in time of peace of free cities, the bulwarks of
Germany, and of flourishing provinces, and retained them
undisturbed.
This constitution, which completely terminated the career of
Germany as an Empire, was chiefly the work of Richelieu, by
whose assistance — Romish Cardinal though he was — religious
freedom in Germany was preserved. Richelieu, with a view to
further the interests of the State whose affairs he superintended,
adopted the exact opposite of that policy which he promoted in
the case of its enemies; for he reduced the latter to political
impotence by ratifying the political independence of the several
parts of the Empire, while at home he destroyed the
independence of the Protestant party. His fate has consequently
resembled that of many great statesmen, inasmuch as he has been
cursed by his countrymen, while his enemies have looked upon
the work by which he ruined them as the most sacred goal of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 457
their desires — the consummation of their rights and liberties.
The result of the struggle therefore was the forcibly achieved
and now politically ratified coexistence of religious parties,
forming political communities whose relations are determined
according to prescriptive principles of civil or [rather, for such
their true nature was] of private right.
The Protestant Church increased and so perfected the stability
of its political existence by the fact that one of the states which
had adopted the principles of the Reformation raised itself to the
position of an independent European power. This power was
destined to start into a new life with Protestantism: Prussia, viz.,
which making its appearance at the end of the seventeenth
century, was indebted, if not for origination, yet certainly for the
consolidation of its strength, to Frederick the Great; and the
Seven Years’ War was the struggle by which that consolidation
was accomplished. Frederick II demonstrated the independent
vigor of his power by resisting that of almost all Europe — the
union of its leading states. He appeared as the hero of
Protestantism, and that not individually merely, like Gustavus
Adolphus, but as the ruler of a state. The Seven Years’ War was
indeed in itself not a war of religion; but it was so in view of its
ultimate issues, and in the disposition of the soldiers as well as
of the potentates under whose banner they fought. The Pope
consecrated the sword of Field-Marshal Daun, and the chief
object which the Allied Powers proposed to themselves was the
crushing of Prussia as the bulwark of the Protestant Church. But
Frederick the Great not only made Prussia one of the great
powers of Europe as a Protestant power, but was also a
philosophical King — an altogether peculiar and unique
phenomenon in modern times.
There had been English Kings who were subtle theologians,
contending for the principle of absolutism: Frederick on the
contrary took up the Protestant principle in its secular aspect; and
though he was by no means favorable to religious controversies,
and did not side with one party or the other, he had the
consciousness of Universality, which is the profoundest depth to
which Spirit can attain, and is Thought conscious of its own
inherent power.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 458
Chapter III. The Éclaircissement and Revolution39
Protestantism had introduced the principle of Subjectivity,
importing religious emancipation and inward harmony, but
accompanying this with the belief in Subjectivity as Evil, and in
a power [adverse to man’s highest interests] whose embodiment
is “the World.” Within the Catholic pale also, the casuistry of the
Jesuits brought into vogue interminable investigations, as tedious
and wire-drawn as those in which the scholastic theology
delighted, respecting the subjective spring of the Will and the
motives that affect it. This Dialectic, which unsettles all
particular judgments and opinions, transmuting the Evil into
Good and Good into Evil, left at last nothing remaining but the
mere action of subjectivity itself, the Abstractum of Spirit —
Thought. Thought contemplates everything under the form of
Universality, and is consequently the impulsion towards and
production of the Universal. In that elder scholastic theology the
real subject-matter of investigation — the doctrine of the Church
— remained an ultramundane affair; in the Protestant theology
also Spirit still sustained a relation to the Ultramundane; for on
the one side we have the will of the individual — the Spirit of
Man — I, myself, and on the other the Grace of God, the Holy
Ghost; and so in the Wicked, the Devil. But in Thought, Self
moves within the limits of its own sphere; that with which it is
occupied — its objects are as absolutely present to it [as they
were distinct and separate in the intellectual grade above
mentioned] ; for in thinking I must elevate the object to
Universality.40 This is utter and absolute Freedom, for the pure
Ego, like pure Light, is with itself alone [is not involved with any
alien principle] ; thus that which is diverse from itself, sensuous
or spiritual, no longer presents an object of dread, for in
contemplating such diversity it is inwardly free and can freely
confront it. A practical interest makes use of, consumes the
objects offered to it: a theoretical interest calmly contemplates
them, assured that in themselves they present no alien element.
— Consequently, the ne plus ultra of Inwardness, of
Subjectiveness, is Thought. Man is not free, when he is not
thinking; for except when thus engaged he sustains a relation to
the world around him as to another, an alien form of being. This
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 459
comprehension — the penetration of the Ego into and beyond
other forms of being with the most profound self-certainty [the
identity of subjective and objective Reason being recognized],
directly involves the harmonization of Being: for it must be
observed that the unity of Thought with its Object is already
implicitly present [i.e., in the fundamental constitution of the
Universe], for Reason is the substantial basis of Consciousness
as well as of the External and Natural. Thus that which presents
itself as the Object of Thought is no longer an absolutely distinct
form of existence [ein Jenseits], not of an alien and grossly
substantial [as opposed to intelligible] nature.
Thought is the grade to which Spirit has now advanced. It
involves the Harmony of Being in its purest essence, challenging
the external world to exhibit the same Reason which Subject [the
Ego] possesses. Spirit perceives that Nature — the World —
must also be an embodiment of Reason, for God created it on
principles of Reason. An interest in the contemplation and
comprehension of the present world became universal. Nature
embodies Universality, inasmuch as it is nothing other than
Sorts, Genera, Power, Gravitation, etc., phenomenally presented.
Thus Experimental Science became the science of the World; for
experimental science involves on the one hand the observation
of phenomena, on the other hand also the discovery of the Law,
the essential being, the hidden force that causes those phenomena
— thus reducing the data supplied by observation to their simple
principles. Intellectual consciousness was first extricated from
that sophistry of thought, which unsettles everything, by
Descartes. As it was the purely German nations among whom
the principle of Spirit first manifested itself, so it was by the
Romanic nations that the abstract idea (to which the character
assigned them above — viz., that of internal schism, more
readily conducted them) was first comprehended. Experimental
science therefore very soon made its way among them (in
common with the Protestant English), but especially among the
Italians. It seemed to men as if God had but just created the
moon and stars, plants and animals, as if the laws of the universe
were now established for the first time; for only then did they
feel a real interest in the universe, when they recognized their
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 460
own Reason in the Reason which pervades it. The human eye
became clear, perception quick, thought active and
interpretative. The discovery of the laws of Nature enabled men
to contend against the monstrous superstition of the time, as also
against all notions of mighty alien powers which magic alone
could conquer. The assertion was even ventured on, and that by
Catholics not less than by Protestants, that the External [and
Material], with which the Church insisted upon associating
superhuman virtue, was external and material, and nothing more
— that the Host was simply dough, the relics of the Saints mere
bones. The independent authority of Subjectivity was maintained
against belief founded on authority, and the Laws of Nature were
recognized as the only bond connecting phenomena with
phenomena. Thus all miracles were disallowed: for Nature is a
system of known and recognized Laws; Man is at home in it, and
that only passes for truth in which he finds himself at home; he
is free through the acquaintance he has gained with Nature. Nor
was thought less vigorously directed to the Spiritual side of
things: Right and [Social] Morality came to be looked upon as
having their foundation in the actual present Will of man,
whereas formerly it was referred only to the command of God
enjoined ab extra, written in the Old and New Testament, or
appearing in the form of particular Right [as opposed to that
based on general principles] in old parchments, as privilegia, or
in international compacts. What the nations acknowledge as
international Right was deduced empirically from observation (as
in the work of Grotius) ; then the source of the existing civil and
political law was looked for, after Cicero’s fashion, in those
instincts of men which Nature has planted in their hearts — e.g.,
the social instinct; next the principle of security for the person
and property of the citizens, and of the advantage of the
commonwealth — that which belongs to the class of “reasons of
State.” On these principles private rights were on the one hand
despotically contravened, but on the other hand such
contravention was the instrument of carrying out the general
objects of the State in opposition to mere positive or prescriptive
la tête près du bonnet]; but this is a superficial solution: the fact
is that the formal principle of philosophy in Germany encounters
a concrete real World in which Spirit finds inward satisfaction
and in which conscience is at rest. For on the one hand it was the
Protestant World itself which advanced so far in Thought as to
realize the absolute culmination of Self-Consciousness; on the
other hand, Protestantism enjoys, with respect to the moral and
legal relations of the real world, a tranquil confidence in the
[Honorable] Disposition of men — a sentiment, which, [in the
Protestant World,] constituting one and the same thing with
Religion, is the fountain of all the equitable arrangements that
prevail with regard to private right and the constitution of the
State. In Germany the éclaircissement was conducted in the
interest of theology: in France it immediately took up a position
of hostility to the Church. In Germany the entire compass of
secular relations had already undergone a change for the better;
those pernicious ecclesiastical institutes of celibacy, voluntary
pauperism, and laziness, had been already done away with; there
was no dead weight of enormous wealth attached to the Church,
and no constraint put upon Morality — a constraint which is the
source and occasion of vices; there was not that unspeakably
hurtful form of iniquity which arises from the interference of
spiritual power with secular law, nor that other of the Divine
Right of Kings, i.e. the doctrine that the arbitrary will of princes,
in virtue of their being “the Lord’s Anointed,” is divine and holy:
on the contrary their will is regarded as deserving of respect only
so far as in association with reason, it wisely contemplates Right,
Justice, and the weal of the community. The principle of
Thought, therefore, had been so far conciliated already;
moreover the Protestant World had a conviction that in the
Harmonization which had previously been evolved [in the sphere
of Religion] the principle which would result in a further
development of equity in the political sphere was already
present.
Consciousness that has received an abstract culture, and whose
sphere is the Understanding [Verstand] can be indifferent to
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 465
Religion, but Religion is the general form in which Truth exists
With this was connected another remarkable phenomenon,
common to the Catholic with the Protestant World. The human
mind was driven into the Inward, the Abstract, and the Religious
element was regarded as utterly alien to the secular. That lively
consciousness of his subjective life and of the inward origin of
his volition that had been awakened in man, brought with it the
belief in Evil, as a vast power the sphere of whose malign
dominion is the Secular. This belief presents a parallelism with
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 445
the view in which the sale of Indulgences originated : for as
eternal salvation could be secured for money, so by paying the
price of one’s salvation through a compact made with the Devil,
the riches of the world and the unlimited gratification of desires
and passions could be secured. Thus arose that famous legend of
Faust, who in disgust at the unsatisfactory character of
speculative science, is said to have plunged into the world and
purchased all its glory at the expense of his salvation. Faust, if
we may trust the poet, had the enjoyment of all that the world
could give, in exchange for his soul’s weal; but those poor
women who were called Witches were reputed to get nothing
more by the bargain than the gratification of a petty revenge by
making a neighbor’s cow go dry or giving a child the measles.
But in awarding punishment it was not the magnitude of the
injury in the loss of the milk or the sickness of the child that was
considered; it was the abstract power of the Evil One in them that
was attacked. The belief in this abstract, special power whose
dominion is the world — in the Devil and his devices —
occasioned an incalculable number of trials for witchcraft both
in Catholic and Protestant countries. It was impossible to prove
the guilt of the accused; they were only suspected : it was
therefore only a direct knowledge [one not mediated by proofs]
on which this fury against the evil principle professed to be
based. It was indeed necessary to have recourse to evidence, but
the basis of these judicial processes was simply the belief that
certain individuals were possessed by the power of the Evil One.
This delusion raged among the nations in the sixteenth century
with the fury of a pestilence. The main impulse was suspicion.
The principle of suspicion assumes a similarly terrible shape
during the sway of the Roman Emperors, and under
Robespierre’s Reign of Terror; when mere disposition,
unaccompanied by any overt act or expression, was made an
object of punishment. Among the Catholics, it was the
Dominicans to whom (as was the Inquisition in all its branches)
the trials for witchcraft were intrusted. Father Spee, a noble
Jesuit, wrote a treatise against them (he is also the author of a
collection of fine poems bearing the title of “Trutznachtigall,”)
giving a full exposure of the terrible character of criminal justice
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 446
in proceedings of this kind. Torture, which was only to be
applied once, was continued until a confession was extorted. If
the accused fainted under the torture it was averred that the Devil
was giving them sleep: if convulsions supervened, it was said
that the Devil was laughing in them; if they held out steadfastly,
the Devil was supposed to give them power. These persecutions
spread like an epidemic sickness through Italy, France, Spain and
Germany. The earnest remonstrances of enlightened men, such
as Spec and others, already produced a considerable effect. But
it was Thomasius, a Professor of Halle, who first opposed this
prevalent superstition with very decided success. The entire
phenomenon is in itself most remarkable when we reflect that we
have not long been quit of this frightful barbarity (even as late as
the year 1780 a witch was publicly burned at Glarus in
Switzerland). Among the Catholics persecution was directed
against heretics as well as against witches: we might say indeed
that they were placed in one category; the unbelief of the heretics
was regarded as none other than the indwelling principle of Evil
— a possession similar to the other.
Leaving this abstract form of Subjectiveness we have now to
consider the secular side — the constitution of the State and the
advance of Universality — the recognition of the universal laws
of Freedom. This is the second and the essential point.
Chapter II. Influence of the Reformation on Political
Development.
In tracing the course of the political development of the period,
we observe in the first place the consolidation of Monarchy, and
the Monarch invested with an authority emanating from the
State. The incipient stage in the rise of royal power, and the
commencement of that unity which the states of Europe attained,
belong to a still earlier period. While these changes were going
forward, the entire body of private obligations and rights which
had been handed down from the Middle Age, still retained
validity. Infinitely important is this form of private rights, which
the organic constituents of the executive power of the State have
assumed. At their apex we find a fixed and positive principle —
the exclusive right of one family to the possession of the throne,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 447
and the hereditary succession of sovereigns further restricted by
the law of primogeniture. This gives the State an immovable
centre. The fact that Germany was an elective empire prevented
its being consolidated into one state; and for the same reason
Poland has vanished from the circle of independent states. The
State must have a final decisive will: but if an individual is to be
the final deciding power, he must be so in a direct and natural
way, not as determined by choice and theoretic views, etc. Even
among the free Greeks the oracle was the external power which
decided their policy on critical occasions; here birth is the oracle
— something independent of any arbitrary volition. But the
circumstance that the highest station in a monarchy is assigned
to a family, seems to indicate that the sovereignty is the private
property of that family. As such that sovereignty would seem to
be divisible; but since the idea of division of power is opposed
to the principle of the state, the rights of the monarch and his
family required to be more strictly defined. Sovereign possession
is not a peculium of the individual ruler, but is consigned to the
dynastic family as a trust; and the estates of the realm possess
security that that trust shall be faithfully discharged, for they
have to guard the unity of the body politic. Thus, then, royal
possession no longer denotes a kind of private property, private
possession of estates, demesnes, jurisdiction, etc., but has
become a State-property — a function pertaining to and involved
with the State.
Equally important, and connected with that just noticed, is the
change of executive powers, functions, duties and rights, which
naturally belong to the State, but which had become private
property and private contracts or obligations — into possession
conferred by the State. The rights of seigneurs and barons were
annulled, and they were obliged to content themselves with
official positions in the State. This transformation of the rights of
vassals into official functions took place in the several kingdoms
in various ways. In France, e.g., the great Barons, who were
governors of provinces, who could claim such offices as a matter
of right, and who like the Turkish Pashas, maintained a body of
troops with the revenues thence derived — troops which they
might at any moment bring into the field against the King —
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 448
were reduced to the position of mere landed proprietors or court
nobility, and those Pashalics became offices held under the
government; or the nobility were employed as officers —
generals of the army, an army belonging to the State. In this
aspect the origination of standing armies is so important an
event; for they supply the monarchy with an independent force
and are as necessary for the security of the central authority
against the rebellion of the subject individuals as for the defence
of the state against foreign enemies. The fiscal system indeed
had not as yet assumed a systematic character — the revenue
being derived from customs, taxes and tolls in countless variety,
besides the subsidies and contributions paid by the estates of the
realm; in return for which the right of presenting a statement of
grievances was conceded to them, as is now the case in Hungary.
— In Spain the spirit of chivalry had assumed a very beautiful
and noble form. This chivalric spirit, this knightly dignity,
degraded to a mere inactive sentiment of honor, has attained
notoriety as the Spanish grandezza. The Grandees were no
longer allowed to maintain troops of their own, and were also
withdrawn from the command of the armies; destitute of power
they had to content themselves as private persons with an empty
title. But the means by which the royal power in Spain was
consolidated, was the Inquisition. This, which was established
for the persecution of those who secretly adhered to Judaism, and
With this was connected another remarkable phenomenon,
common to the Catholic with the Protestant World. The human
mind was driven into the Inward, the Abstract, and the Religious
element was regarded as utterly alien to the secular. That lively
consciousness of his subjective life and of the inward origin of
his volition that had been awakened in man, brought with it the
belief in Evil, as a vast power the sphere of whose malign
dominion is the Secular. This belief presents a parallelism with
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 445
the view in which the sale of Indulgences originated : for as
eternal salvation could be secured for money, so by paying the
price of one’s salvation through a compact made with the Devil,
the riches of the world and the unlimited gratification of desires
and passions could be secured. Thus arose that famous legend of
Faust, who in disgust at the unsatisfactory character of
speculative science, is said to have plunged into the world and
purchased all its glory at the expense of his salvation. Faust, if
we may trust the poet, had the enjoyment of all that the world
could give, in exchange for his soul’s weal; but those poor
women who were called Witches were reputed to get nothing
more by the bargain than the gratification of a petty revenge by
making a neighbor’s cow go dry or giving a child the measles.
But in awarding punishment it was not the magnitude of the
injury in the loss of the milk or the sickness of the child that was
considered; it was the abstract power of the Evil One in them that
was attacked. The belief in this abstract, special power whose
dominion is the world — in the Devil and his devices —
occasioned an incalculable number of trials for witchcraft both
in Catholic and Protestant countries. It was impossible to prove
the guilt of the accused; they were only suspected : it was
