WOMAN'S WORK IN MUSIC

CHAPTER I.

ANCIENT AND MYTHICAL


The Church of Rome, though admitting no women to a share in performing
its services, has yet made a woman the patron saint of music. The
religions of antiquity have paid even more homage to the weaker sex in
the matter, as the multitude of musical nymphs and fostering goddesses
will show.

Of Saint Cecilia herself little is known accurately. The very apocryphal
legend states that about the year 230 a noble Roman lady of that name,
who had been converted to Christianity, was forced into an unwilling
marriage with a certain Valerian, a pagan. She succeeded in converting
her husband and his brother, but all were martyred because of their
faith. This it is stated, took place under the Prefect Almacus, but
history gives no such name. It is unfortunate, also, that the earliest
writer mentioning her, Fortunatus, Bishop of Poitiers, speaks of her as
having died in Sicily between the years 176 and 180. It is doubtful
whether she would have been known at all, in connection with the art,
but for a passing phrase in her story, which relates that she often
united instrumental music to that of her voice in sounding the praises
of the Lord. Because of these few words, she is famed throughout musical
Christendom, half the musical societies in Europe are named after her,
and Raphael's picture, Dryden's ode, Stefano Maderno's statue, and a
hundred other great art works have come into existence.

The earliest inferences of woman's influence in music are to be drawn
from the Hindoo mythology.[1] According to the tabular schedule of all
knowledge, found in the ancient Brahmin records, music as an art belongs
in the second chief division of lesser sciences, but on its mathematical
and philosophical side it is accorded a much higher position, and is
treated of in the oldest and most sacred Hindoo work, the Veda. This
authority tells us that when Brahma had lain in the original egg some
thousand billion years, he split it by the force of his thought, and
made heaven and earth from the two fragments. After this, Manu brought
into being ten great forces, whence came all the gods, goddesses, good
and evil spirits. Among the lesser deities were the genii of music
(Gandharbas) and those of the dance (Apsarasas), who furnished
entertainment for the gods before man possessed the art.

About this time the female element began to assert itself. At Brahma's
command, his consort, Sarisvati, goddess of speech and oratory, brought
music to man, incidentally giving the Hindoos their finest musical
instrument, the vina. The demigod Nared became the protector of the art,
but Maheda Chrishna performed a more material service by allowing five
keys, or modes, to spring from his head, in the shape of nymphs, while
his wife, Parbuti, produced one more. Then Brahma helped the cause along
by adding thirty lesser keys, or modes, all of them in the form of
nymphs also.

These modes varied in character, some of them being too fiery to be
attempted by mortals. It is related that Akbar, the emperor, once
ordered the famous singer, Naik Gobaul, to sing the Raagni, or
improvisation, of the mode of fire. The poor singer entreated for a less
dangerous task, but in vain. Then he plunged up to his neck in the
waters of the river Jumna, and began. Before he had finished half of the
song, the water around him began to boil. He paused, but, finding the
emperor's curiosity relentless, continued the strain, until at the close
his body burst into flames and was consumed. Another melody caused the
formation of clouds and the fall of rain, and a female singer is said
once to have saved Bengal from drought and famine by means of this lay.
Many other refrains had a similar power over the forces of nature; one
could make the sun disappear and bring on night at midday, while others
could change winter to spring, or rain to sunshine.

In all Indian legends, the charm of music is described as of immense
potency. All animate and inanimate nature is represented as listening
with ecstasy to the singing of Chrishna and Parbuti.[2] When Chrishna
was on earth, in the form of a shepherd, there were sixteen thousand
pastoral nymphs, or shepherdesses, who fell in love with him. They all
tried to win his heart by the power of music, and each one sang to him
in a different manner. Hence arose the sixteen thousand different keys
which were said to have existed at one time in India.

The Hindoo musical system of to-day is likewise ascribed largely to
female sources. The scale consists of seven chief tones, which are
represented by as many heavenly sisters. The names of the tones (sa, ri,
ga, ma, pa, dha, ni, corresponding to our do, re, mi, etc.) are merely
abbreviations of the names of the nymphs who preside over them. The
tones of the scale are divided into quarters, and the number of quarters
in the diatonic scale intervals is four, three, two, four, four, three,
and two. Thus the number of possible modes is vastly greater than in our
own scale, which has only semitones. There are six chief modes,
represented by six genii, while each one is married to five of the
thirty nymphs who typify the lesser modes. Each one of the genii has
eight sons, and these are wedded to a nymph apiece, making forty-eight
in all. Every member of this prolific musical family presides over
something, if it is only one of the quarter tones that form the scale.

To illustrate the method of naming, the four quarters of the fifth scale
tone (pa, or Panchama) belong to the nymphs Malina, Chapala, Lola, and
Serveretna. The next full tone (dha) is owned by Santa and her sisters.
If the higher tone, dha, should be flatted, giving it the same pitch as
the upper quarter of the lower tone, pa, the Hindoo musician would not
speak of dha as being flat, but would say instead, "Serveretna has been
introduced to the family of Santa and her sisters."

The Hindoo music of to-day is not as potent as in mythical times. The
people themselves acknowledge the decline of their art, and admit that
even in the last century or two it has deteriorated. As for the
miracle-working Ragas, or improvised songs, the people in Bengal will
say that they can probably be heard in Cashmere, while the inhabitants
of Cashmere will send the inquirer back to Bengal. Woman, too, has a
less important position than of old. "When the ancient sages made our
musical system," says an eminent Brahmin in an interview at San
Francisco, "there were many women among them; but now not one can
accomplish anything in the art."

In the traditions of ancient Egypt, music is entirely under the
patronage of male gods. Thoth, the Egyptian Hermes, invented the lyre by
striking the tendons of a dead tortoise, which had dried and stretched
in the shell. Osiris, too, the chief of the Egyptian gods, protected the
art, although Strabo says music was not allowed in his temple at
Abydos. While travelling in Ethiopia, the story runs, Osiris met a
troupe of revelling satyrs, and, being fond of singing, he admitted them
to his train of musicians. In their midst were nine young maidens,
skilled in music and various sciences, evidently the prototype of the
Grecian Muses. Horus, the son of Osiris (equivalent to the Greek Apollo)
was considered the god of Harmony.

An important mythical character was Maneros, son of the earliest
Egyptian king. He seems to hold the same position as Linus, son of
Apollo, among the Greeks. The first song of Egyptian music was a dirge
for his untimely end, and a lament for the swift passing away of youth,
spring, joy, and so on. Gradually the song itself, instead of the king's
son, began to be called Maneros, and became the well-known banquet song
of the social feasts, calling upon the guests to enjoy life while they
might. In time the song became a symbol of gaiety and merriment instead
of grief.

In most of the ancient civilizations, the songs appear to have been
accompanied by clapping of hands, to mark the rhythm. There were many
actual dances, also, in ancient Egypt, as is fully proven by a number of
the old paintings. Some were like our jigs, break-downs, or clog-dances,
while others consisted of regular figures, such as forward and back,
swing, and so on, the latter kind being restricted to the lower orders.
In all of these, women must have taken a large part, and doubtless they
were responsible for some of the music. They were not allowed to play
the flute, but could indulge in the tabor and other instruments. Some of
the scenes depicted closely resemble the modern stage, and it is more
than probable that, when the audiences of to-day applaud our own ballet
scenes, they are enjoying themselves in the old Egyptian manner.

There can be no doubt that woman played an important part in music,
possibly even in composition, in many civilizations which apparently
allowed her only a restricted field of action. The Empress of Germany
recently defined woman's sphere as consisting of four
subjects,--children, clothes, cooking, and church; yet the German women
have far more influence than this official utterance would indicate. It
is not surprising, then, to find in the folios of Lepsius a reproduction
of something analogous to our conservatories of music. It represents a
course of musical instruction in the school of singers and players of
King Amenhotep IV., of the eighteenth dynasty. There are several large
and small rooms, connected with each other, and containing furniture and
musical instruments. In some are the musicians practising and teaching.
One teacher sits listening to the singing of a young girl, while another
pupil is playing the accompaniment on a harp. Still another girl stands
attentively listening to the teacher's instructions, as in a modern
class. In another place are two girls practising a dance with harp
music. In one room is a young lady having her hair dressed, while in
another a young girl has placed aside her harp and is sitting down to
lunch with a companion. All this goes to show that different
civilizations often resemble one another more than would appear at first
sight, and very probably woman's part in ancient Egyptian music was much
like that which she plays in our own to-day.

The earliest Hebrew music was undoubtedly modelled after that of Egypt.
In later Biblical times, however, there were many national instruments,
and the style of the music must have been characteristic. The Old
Testament, even in its earlier books, contains many examples of the
songs of the people. Their ancient folk-music showed three principal
styles,--the joyous bridal song, the cheerful harvest or vintage song,
and the wailing funeral song; and there are many examples of each in the
Scriptures. As there was no definite notation among the ancient Hebrews,
the actual tunes that were sung with these songs will never be known.
But it may be possible that the melodies have been preserved by rote,
for it is certain that these three schools of singing exist to-day in
Arabia and Syria. Whole villages are known to unite in a seven-day
festival of rejoicing, not unlike the one at the wedding of Samson, as
described in the fourteenth chapter of Judges.

The Song of Solomon presents an entire set of bridal songs in the
popular vein. A good example of the mourning song is found in the
opening chapter of the second book of Samuel, where David laments the
death of Saul and Jonathan. It is somewhat exceptional because of its
being rendered by a man, for in Eastern countries the professional
mourners were always women, hired for the occasion. The men might join
in the chorus of woe if they wished, but the main part of the song was
always given by the women, who were not unlike the "Keeners," heard in
Ireland on similar occasions, even down to recent times. The book of
Lamentations presents a series of funeral songs, written in imitation of
the professional lays of grief, and containing many allusions to the
mourning women. In the fifth chapter of Amos, in Habakkuk, and many
other books, are further illustrations of such folk-songs. The fifth
chapter of Isaiah begins with the cheerful style of the vintage song,
and then suddenly changes to a song of grief, forming an artistic
contrast that must have been highly effective.

In the Hebrew songs, as in the Egyptian, there must have been much
dramatic action united with the vocal work. When the word "dancing"
occurs, it generally means only gesture and pantomime. Its use is made
evident in the song of Moses, in Exodus XV. It requires little
imagination to picture Miriam using a folk-song with which her hearers
were familiar, improvising words to suit the occasion, and illustrating
the whole with successive gestures of pride, contempt, sarcasm, and
triumph, while the assembled multitude joined in the chorus at every
opportunity.

Still more evident does this union of voice and action become in the
song of Deborah and Barak, in Judges V. A possible description of the
performance of this musical comedy is given by Herder, who suggests that
"Probably verses 1-11 were interrupted by the shouts of the populace;
verses 12-27 were a picture of the battle, with a naming of the leaders
with praise or blame, and mimicking each one as named; verses 28-30 were
mockery of the triumph of Sisera, and the last verse was given as a
chorus by the whole people." According to this, the tune must certainly
have been a familiar one. The whole scene, with its extemporized words,
its clapping of hands to mark the rhythm, and its alternation of solo
and chorus, was probably not unlike the singing at some of the negro
camp-meetings on the Southern plantations.

Foremost among the patrons of the art in Grecian mythology are the
Muses. These were not always nine in number. Originally, at Mount
Helicon, in B[oe]otia, three were worshipped,--Melete (meditation),
Mneme (memory), and Aoide (song). Three Muses were also recognized at
Delphi and Sicyon. Four are mentioned as daughters of Jupiter and
Plusia, while some accounts speak of seven Muses, daughters of Pierus.
Eight was the number known in Athens, until finally the Thracian worship
of nine spread over the whole of Greece. The parentage of these
divinities is given with as many variations as their number. Most
commonly they were considered daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (memory),
born in Pieria at the foot of Mount Olympus. Some call them daughters of
Uranus and Gæa, others of Pierus and Antiope, still others of Apollo or
of Jupiter and Minerva. The analogy between the Muses and the nine
maidens in the Egyptian troupe of Osiris has already been noted.

In Homer's poems, the Muses have already attained their well-known abode
on Olympus, where they sing the festive songs at the banquets of the
immortals. They were supposed to inspire the mind of the bards, and in
early times the poets were perfectly sincere in invoking them and
believing in their inspiration. The Muses, in presiding over the various
branches of Grecian art, appeared unable to brook any rivalry. Thamyris,
an ancient Thracian bard, boldly challenged them to a trial of skill,
and, on being overcome by them in the contest, was deprived by them of
his sight and of the power of singing. He is represented in art as
holding a broken lyre. The nine daughters of King Pierus of Macedonia
fared no better, and after an unsuccessful contest were changed into
birds. The Muses were closely connected with Apollo, who was looked upon
as their leader. Many mountains, as well as grottos, wells, and springs
in various parts of Greece, were sacred to them.

The Sirens were another personification of the marvellous power of music
among primitive peoples. Their parentage also is variously given, though
they are usually mentioned as daughters of the river god, Achelous. They
are generally represented as maidens, with a more or less extensive
equipment of wings and other plumage. These wings were obtained at their
request when Proserpine was carried off, that they might be better able
to hunt for her. But another account says that they refused their
sympathy to Ceres, and were given their feathery coating by her in
punishment. Some writers say it was due to Aphrodite, who was angered at
their virginity. The Sirens, as well as other ambitious performers, were
rash enough to attempt a contest with the Muses, and met with the
customary defeat. The victorious nine then pounced upon the unfortunate
trio, and tore off wings and feathers.

The Sirens' chief occupation consisted in sitting on the rocks by the
sea and singing to passing mariners. According to Homer, their island
lay between Æaea and the rock of Scylla, or near the southwestern coast
of Italy; but the Roman poets place them on the Campanian coast. Their
magic power to charm all hearers was to last only until some one proved
himself able to resist their spell; and here again accounts differ.
Homer gives the credit to Ulysses, who stuffed his mariners' ears with
wax, and had them bind him to the mast. Apollonius Rhodius, however, in
the Argonautica, claims the credit for Orpheus, who saved the expedition
of the Argonauts by singing the Sirens into silence, after which the
musical damsels fell from their heights and were themselves changed into
rocks. If some of our modern musicians were put to the same test, and
condemned to death if they failed to charm their auditors, the results
would be beneficial both to art and to the cemeteries. The power of the
Sirens lasted after their death, and, like their cousins in Egyptian and
Indian lore, they used their music to charm the souls of the blessed
dead.

Leaving the realms of the supernatural, the only great name that the
student will find among the musical women of Greece is that of Sappho.
The story of her life is known only in its general outlines, and even
these have been the subject of many learned disputes. She was born near
the close of the seventh century B.C., either at Mytilene or at Eresos
in the island of Lesbos. She grew to maturity at the former place, and
became one of the two great leaders of the Æolian school of lyric
poetry. From the fragments of her poetry, and those of her great rival,
Alcæus, it is evident that the two were not envious of each other's
fame, but lived in the most friendly intercourse. Of the events of her
life, we have only two. One, referred to in the Parian marble and by
Ovid, is her flight from Mytilene to Sicily, between 604 and 592, to
escape from some unknown danger. The other is the well-known story that,
being in love with Phaon, and finding her love unrequited, she cast
herself from the Leucadian rock. This rock is a promontory on the
island of Leucas, upon which was a temple to Apollo. At the annual
festival of the god, it was the custom to cast down a criminal from this
rock into the sea. To break his fall, birds of all kinds were attached
to him, and, if he reached the sea uninjured, boats were ready to pick
him up. This apparently was a rite of expiation, and as such gave rise
to the well-known story that unfortunate lovers leaped from this rock to
seek relief from their distress. The story of Sappho and Phaon is one of
these, but it has been claimed that its authenticity vanishes at the
first breath of criticism.

It is fair to class Sappho as a musician, for in ancient Greece poetry
and music were inseparable. Of her poems, which filled nine books, only
a few fragments remain, of which the most important is a splendid ode to
Aphrodite. At Mytilene she appears to have gathered about her a large
and elegant circle of young women, who were her pupils in poetry, music,
and personal cultivation. Her influence must have been widespread, for
the list of her disciples includes names from all parts of Greece. Her
work of teaching, in the midst of her fair followers, has been compared
with that of Socrates surrounded by the flower of the Athenian youth.
The power of her poetry is shown by the story of its effect on the
rugged character of Solon, the lawmaker. Hearing for the first time one
of her pieces, sung to him by his nephew, he expressed in the most
impassioned terms the wish that he might not die before having learned
such a beautiful song.

The career of Sappho is made more wonderful by the fact that woman's
work in ancient Greece was supposed to consist only of family duties.
She taught her sons in childhood until they were sent to their regular
masters, and she guided her daughters and set them an example in doing
household duties. According to Pericles, that woman was most to be
prized of whom no one spoke, either in praise or blame. Because of
Sappho's prominence and social activity, but more especially because of
the ardent character of some of her poems, her good name has been
assailed by many modern critics. The majority, however, consider the
accusations as groundless.

Alcman, the great lyric poet of Sparta (Lydian by birth), brought the
so-called Lydian measure to its highest perfection. He was always ready
to praise women in his verses, and wrote some choruses especially for
the--

  "Honey-voiced, lovely singing maidens,"

which were sung by female voices only. B[oe]otia could boast of two
great poetesses. Myrtis, a native of Anthedon, is reported to have been
the instructress of Pindar, and is said to have contended with him for
the palm of superiority. She was famous through the whole of Greece, and
many places possessed statues in honour of her. The second poetess was
Corinna, of Tanagra, sometimes called the Theban because of her long
residence at Thebes. She flourished about 490 B.C., and was a
contemporary of Pindar. Like Myrtis, she is said to have instructed him,
and is credited with having gained a victory over him in the public
games at Thebes. Only a few fragments of her work have been preserved to
us. But Pausanias, who states that she defeated Pindar no less than five
times, thinks that her personal charms may have had something to do with
the matter.

While teaching Pindar, Corinna once offered to beautify his earlier
efforts with mythological allusions. The pupil, nettled by this
criticism, soon brought to his instructress a new poem, of which the
first six stanzas touched upon every part of Theban mythology; whereupon
she cooled his enthusiasm by remarking with a smile: "One must sow seed
by the handful, not by the bagful."

Whether the character of these earlier poetesses was above reproach or
not, it is certain that in the later days of Grecian civilization music
was handed over to the most degraded classes. In Egypt the caste of
professional musicians was not held in any respect, and the art was
often merely an added accomplishment to enhance the value of slaves. So,
too, in Greece, the practice of music was given over to the Hetæræ, or
courtesans. That these women were at times able to win a high position
is amply proven by the case of Aspasia. A native of Miletus, she came to
live in Athens, and there gained the affections of the great leader
Pericles, not more by her beauty than by her high mental
accomplishments. The story of her life, and of the literary and
philosophical circle which she drew around her, is too well known to
need repetition. Another famous courtesan, though less well endowed
mentally, and evidently on a much lower plane of character, was the
famous flute-player Lamia. It was her beauty rather than her intellect
that won the great honours which she attained; and a temple dedicated to
her as Venus Lamia, as well as a signet upon which her portrait has been
preserved, bear witness to this fact.

The character of Greek music can only be conjectured. At first simple,
it was regulated on a mathematical basis by Pythagoras, who understood
the laws of vibration. Later on it developed into something more rich
and varied, and, while still devoted to unison, or melodic, effects, it
was undoubtedly full of beauty, as is the old Scotch music. Its great
development, as well as the use of many small instruments (kithara,
flute, etc.), go far to prove that music must have formed a larger part
of woman's domestic life than the actual records show.

Roman civilization borrowed much from Greece, especially in the matter
of art. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that the musical status
of Rome, especially in her later days, was a mere replica of that of
Greece. In the instrumental field, we find the lyre of less importance,
but the flute (a term that included reed instruments also) was
constantly used in ceremonial and sacrificial music. Trumpets were in
use at all triumphal processions, while in the days of the empire the
well-known but problematical water-organ became popular. Although the
Roman domestic conditions admitted of more freedom than those of Greece,
it is doubtful if the women took any important part in performance or
composition of music. There are no great poetesses on the Roman roll of
honour, while there are many on that of Greece.

Rome differed from Greece in having its poetry and music written by
different authors, while in Greece both words and notes emanated from
the same brain. But even among men the Romans possessed no important
composers. The names of those who wrote music to the plays of Terence
and Plautus (the plays themselves being imitations of the Greek) are
known to history, but the composers possessed no position of
consequence. If the men received no great homage, there must have been
little incentive for women to strive in the musical field.

As in Greece, female slaves played a large part in the world of
art,--with this difference, that in Rome the masters were usually on a
lower plane of cultivation than their own slaves. Dancing was an adjunct
to music, though often practised as a separate branch of entertainment,
and brought to a high state of perfection in its pantomimic form.

The position of woman in the far East was inferior even to her station
in Greece and Rome. In China, for example, everything feminine was held
in contempt. This had its influence on the musical system of the
Chinese, according to one of their legends. After the invention of
music, the formation of various instruments, and the composition of many
songs, all due to more or less mythical emperors, Hoang-Ti, who reigned
about the year 2600 B. C., decided to have the art scientifically
investigated and its rules formulated. In his day music was practised,
but not understood in its natural elements. The emperor therefore
ordered Ling-Lun to look into the matter.

This dignitary, about whose work many anecdotes exist, travelled to
Northwestern China, and took up his abode on a high mountain, near a
bamboo grove. On cutting a stalk and excavating the pith between two of
the joints, he found that the tube gave the exact pitch of the normal
human voice, and also the sound given by the waters of the Hoang-Ho,
which had its source near the scene. Thus was discovered the fundamental
tone of the scale.

Meanwhile, the Foang-Hoang, or sacred bird of Chinese mythology,
appeared with its mate and perched upon a neighbouring tree. The male
bird sang a scale of several tones, while the female sang another
composed of different tones. The first note of the male bird coincided
in pitch with Ling-Lun's bamboo tube, and by cutting other tubes the
erudite investigator proceeded to reproduce all the tones of both. By
combining these, he was able to form a complete chromatic scale. But,
owing to the prejudice against the weaker sex, the tones of the female
(called feminine tones even to-day) were discarded in favour of those
of the male bird. The latter, the basis of Chinese music, correspond to
the black keys of our piano, while the former were equivalent to the
white, or diatonic, notes of our scale.

That Chinese music, based on this pentatonic scale, need not be at all
displeasing, is proved by many of the old Scotch tunes, which are built
on the same system. An excellent illustration of its rhythmic structure,
frequent iterations, and melodic character may be found in our own
familiar tune, "There is a happy land, far, far away." The harsh quality
that Europeans often find in Chinese performances is undoubtedly not a
necessary adjunct, as the same criticism may be made upon many of our
own street singers or brass bands.

The Chinese, like many other ancient nations, have a great contempt for
the caste of musicians and actors, although enjoying the drama keenly.
Parents have almost unlimited power over their children, and may sell
them as slaves, or even in some cases kill them; but they are not
allowed to sell them to the troupes of strolling comedians or to
magicians. Any one convicted of doing this, or aiding in the
transaction, is punished by one hundred blows of the bamboo. Any person
of free parentage marrying an actor or actress receives the same
punishment. Yet, while musicians connected with the stage are held
under the ban, those who devote themselves to the religious rites
receive the highest esteem. These, however, cannot be women.

The music of Japan, though built on the chromatic scale, was much the
same as that of China. Actors and musicians command hardly more respect
in the island than on the Continent. Women play a negative part in both
countries, if we except the Geishas, who entertain in the tea-houses.
But Japan has made such rapid strides in civilization recently that it
may not be impossible for woman to develop the activity that she has
already shown in Western lands.




CHAPTER II.

MEDIÆVAL


The position of woman among the northern races that overthrew the Roman
power was wholly different from that which she held in the more ancient
epoch, but even under the newer regime it was no enviable one. In many
of the earlier Germanic systems, wives were bought by a definite payment
of goods or of cattle. That this was a recognized practice is shown in
the laws of Ethelbert, which state that if a man carry off a freeman's
wife, he must at his own expense procure another for the injured
husband. Usually women had no rights of inheritance, though in some
cases they could inherit when there were no male children, and in others
they could transmit the right of inheritance to their male descendants.
Sometimes they were allowed to inherit movable property of a certain
sort, probably largely the result of their own handiwork. The evident
idea of the Salic law was to allow woman a marriage portion only, and
as soon as she was safely bestowed upon some neighbouring group of
people, neither she nor her children had any further claim upon the
parent group.

Great cruelty was evident in the treatment of female slaves. According
to the laws of Athelstan, if one of these were convicted of theft, she
should in punishment be burned alive by eighty other such slaves. A
similar example of stern discipline is afforded by the ecclesiastical
provision, occurring no less than three times, that, if a woman scourged
her slave to death, she should do penance. It is little wonder that
under these conditions the female slaves would sing in a rather forced
manner, if at all, and the women themselves would hardly indulge in the
gentle art of composing music.

The early Christian Church, too, afforded no encouragement for women to
exert their musical abilities. When the earliest meetings occurred in
the catacombs, the female members of the congregation took their part in
singing the hymns, but, when organized choirs were formed, they were
allowed no place. The singing-schools founded in Rome by the Popes
Sylvester I. and Hilary, at the end of the fourth century, were devoted
solely to the training of male voices. In describing the earlier music,
St. John Chrysostom says: "The psalms which we sing unite all the voices
in one, and the canticles arise harmoniously in unison. Young and old,
rich and poor, women, men, slaves, and citizens, all of us have formed
but one melody together." But the custom of permitting women to join
with men in the singing was abolished by the Synod of Antioch in the
year 379.

In the music of the Celtic and Gaelic races, also, woman had no place.
Their songs, like their lives, were martial in character. The harpists
of Ireland and Wales, and the bagpipers of Scotland, were all men, and
they made strict rules about the admission of new members to their
guilds. Even among the early English minstrels, who devoted their powers
to the milder art of love-songs and Christmas carols, no women are to be
found. The wandering life of these bards and singers was too rude at
first to admit of participation by the gentler sex, and it was only
under more stable conditions of civilization that woman at last gained
the opportunity of showing and developing her talents.

With the advent of chivalry, she found herself at once in a more exalted
position. In this epoch, when cultivated minds began to devote their
energies to other things besides fighting in war and carousing in peace,
music found new and worthier subjects in nature and love and the beauty
of woman. Under the new system she became the arbiter of all knightly
disputes, the queen to whom all obedience was due. From this extreme
worship arose the schools of the Minnesingers and the Troubadours, who
paid her manifold homage in the shape of poetry and song.

According to the general statements of history, the Minnesingers began
their career in the time of Frederick Barbarossa, of Germany. This would
place their origin in the latter part of the twelfth century. Yet it is
a strange fact that Heinrich of Veldig, usually accounted the pioneer in
this new school of singing, utters a complaint about the loss of the
good old times, and bewails the decay of the true greatness of the art
to which he devoted himself. The original song in which he expresses
this sentiment is still extant, and the particular stanza in question
runs as follows:

  "Do man der rehten minne pflag
     Da pflag man ouch der ehren;
   Nu mag man naht und tag
     Die boesen sitte leren;
   Swer dis nu siht, und jens do sach,
     O we! was der nu clagen mag
   Tugende wend sich nu verkehren."

That many of the early songs of the Minnesingers have been preserved is
due to the forethought of Rüdiger of Manesse, a public officer of Zurich
in the fourteenth century. He made a thorough collection of all
specimens of the style of the Minnesingers, and many subsequent works,
such as that of Von Der Hagen, are based upon his researches.

The language ordinarily used by the Minnesingers was that of Suabia,
which was that employed at the imperial and many lesser courts of
Germany. They used it with a skill and delicacy which was generally far
superior to the style of the Troubadours. In performing their works,
they did not, like their western brethren, have recourse to hired
accompanists, or Jongleurs, but supported the vocal part by playing on a
small viol. The Jongleurs were essentially a French institution, and no
class of musicians similar to them existed in Germany. The Minnesingers,
like the Troubadours, were amateurs, and aimed to keep free from the
taint of professionalism. Men of the highest rank were proud to belong
to this order of musicians, and emperors, princes, and famous knights
are found among them.

The love-songs of the Minnesingers, as already intimated, were less
fiery than those of the Troubadours. While the Provençal minstrel
allowed his homage to his chosen lady to proceed to extreme lengths, his
German brother paid a less excessive but far purer tribute to the object
of his affections. Very often, too, the German poets rose to a still
higher level, and sang praises of the ideal qualities of womanhood in
general. Thus the singers of Germany caused far less domestic discord
than those of France.

That there was still some unlicensed gallantry, however, can be seen
from the type of music known as "Wacht-Lieder," or watch-songs. In these
the amorous knight is represented as pleading with the watchman of the
castle for admission to his lady-love. Sometimes the song took the form
of a warning from the watchman, telling that daylight was near and the
knight must depart.

Besides giving the world a host of shorter songs, the period of the
Minnesingers brought forth some really great poets who were successful
in the larger forms. The author, or authors, of the famous
"Nibelungenlied" are unknown; but the work remains to us as the greatest
epic of Germany. Foremost in point of fame stands Wolfram von
Eschenbach, author of the familiar "Parzifal." In depicting his
characters, he strikes a note of idealistic beauty. Another great poet
was Gottfried of Strasburg, almost as famous as Wolfram, and in some
respects his opposite. His characters are endowed with life and vigour,
and eager to seize the pleasures of earth while they last. His best work
was "Tristan and Isolde."

The legend of Tannhäuser, which has crystallized and been handed down to
us in story, has an undoubted basis of fact. The existence of the cave
of Venus, in the Thuringian hill of Hörselburg, may be taken as not
proven; but there certainly was a tournament of song at the castle of
the Wartburg, and many famous knights probably took part in it. Whether
Tannhäuser himself was real is an open question; but there can be no
doubt about Walther von der Vogelweide, who was one of Germany's
greatest masters in the shorter forms.

Examples of still another style in the work of the Minnesingers are
almost surely a direct imitation of the work of the Trouvères of
Northern France. These examples consist of more or less lengthy fables,
or sometimes tales with a pleasing moral attached. Many stories of Roman
history are found among these, and many of the proverbs which we use
without thinking of their authorship date from this time. Among the
latter are, "Set not the wolf to guard the sheep," "Never borrow
trouble,"

  "The king must die,
   And so must I,"

and many other such gems of wisdom.

In all this the women had some share, if they did not play so important
part as their sisters in France. Their position as hostesses, or as the
objects of poetical tribute, enabled them to comment and criticize, and,
if they did little actual composing, they were allowed to take a
prominent part in the performance of music. We find in the old books of
rules and codes of education that the woman of rank and position was
possessed of many accomplishments, if not exactly those that are
expected to-day. One of these codes, or Essenhamens, as they were
called, gives the four chief duties of women, and, making allowance for
the change in civilization, they correspond fairly well with those
already quoted from the present German Empress. The cooking and sewing
remain the same, but, instead of amusing the children, the women were
expected to care for children of a larger growth, by obtaining a
knowledge of surgery. The chatelaine was supposed to take full charge of
her lord if he returned wounded from tourney or battle. Instead of
church matters, the final accomplishment was the secular game of chess.

Another work of the time gives rules of behaviour for women, inculcating
a submissive demeanour that is hardly practised to-day. The usual
modesty of deportment was prescribed; women were always to direct their
glances discreetly downward, and in the case of a stranger were to
speak only when addressed. If a room were full of women, and a man
should suddenly enter, the rules of decorum compelled them to rise
immediately, and remain standing until he should seat himself.

The extent of knightly devotion to women in the age of chivalry can
hardly be exaggerated. The work of Ulrich von Lichtenstein, for
instance, in his "Frauendienst," is full of the most absurd
performances, which any sensible lady would have been justified in
repudiating. The Troubadours indulged in even greater vagaries, and one
Pierre Vidal, in love with a certain Louve de Penautier, whose first
name meant "she-wolf," adopted the name of Loup, and actually assumed a
wolf skin as his garment. To prove his sincerity even more, he insisted
upon being completely wrapped in this hide and hunted by hounds and
horsemen. After the dogs had caught him, he would not allow them to be
pulled off, but insisted upon enduring their attacks for the glory of
his lady-love. When nearly dead, he was rescued and taken to her castle,
where he recovered health if not mental balance.

More noble than any of these was the tribute paid to women by the
Minnesinger Henry of Meissen. Declining to single out any one fair Muse,
he sang of womankind as a whole, and never ceased to praise their
purity, their gentleness, and their nobility. Through his life he was
honoured by them with the title of "Frauenlob" (praise of women), and at
his death they marched in the funeral procession, and each threw a
flower into his grave, making it overflow with blossoms.

The royal house of Suabia did its best to encourage the art of the
Minnesingers, allowing them a liberty of criticism that would ordinarily
be undreamed of in court life. It is in an epoch little later than this
that we find a singer expressing one of his objections to royalty in the
following verse:

  "King Rudolf is a worthy king,
     All praise to him be brought;
   He likes to hear the masters play and sing,
     But after that he gives them naught."

The rise of the Troubadours is due wholly to Oriental influences. There
may have been some native poetry among the pastoral races of the sunny
land of Provence, where the guild flourished, but not a single line of
it remains to us. Moreover, it is certain that the Eastern minstrels
left their impress in Spain, and that the Crusaders brought back from
the Orient, among many other novelties, the custom of encouraging
minstrelsy. The Arabian bards sang chiefly of love, as they well might
in a land where female loveliness received such excessive worship. At
the Saracenic courts, the bards were ever ready to win gratitude, and
even more substantial rewards, by praising the latest favourite at the
expense of former beauties. Provence, with its dazzling sun and glowing
climate, possessed a striking resemblance to the Eastern countries, and
among its inhabitants were many who could boast an Oriental ancestry. No
less than five times did Saracen emirs lead their hosts into the
country, endeavouring to overcome it not only by force of arms, but by
the more peaceful and more certain method of introducing their own
industries and customs. Provence itself was a land of peace and repose,
and could better encourage gentler arts than the warlike nations of
Northern Spain. We may find the Troubadours definitely established there
in the early part of the twelfth century.

The language of their songs is the beautiful "Langue d'oc," so called
from the use of the word "oc" to mean yes, and thus distinguished from
the "Langue d'oil" of Northern France and the "Lingua di si" of Italy.
The "Langue d'oc" was spoken in the entire southern part of France, and
has given its name to a province of the present. So when the nobles of
Provence, in the lordly retirement of their ancestral castles, sought an
entertainment suited to their refined and sympathetic natures, they
were soon imitated by the greater part of the nation.

The songs of the Troubadours were in many cases taken directly from
Eastern models. In early Arabian times it was customary for two
shepherds to converse in music by intoning responsive phrases on their
flutes; and it soon became customary for two minstrels to sing in like
manner. In the early songs of the Bible, too, are many verses whose
second half answers the first, and, in fact, the Hebrew words for
"answer" and "sing" are said to be identical. Among the Troubadours,
this species of musical dialogue took the form of the tenson, or
contention. The use of answering couplets in solo songs is another point
of resemblance. Another favourite Arabian form was the casida, or stanza
constructed with only one rhyme, and the rich and melodious Provençal
tongue lent itself excellently to poems of this structure. So successful
were the Troubadours in using it that sometimes their compositions were
over a hundred lines in length. The short but brilliant Arabian lyrics,
called "Maouchah," or embroidery, were well imitated by dainty and
sparkling lyrics of the Troubadours. The Oriental mourning song became
the Planh, or dirge. The evening tribute of the Arabian minstrels to
their chosen loves became the serenade, while the Troubadours went
still further in this vein by originating the aubade, or morning song.
Among the other forms used, the verse was merely a set of couplets, the
chanson was divided into several stanzas, while the sonnet was much
freer in form than at present. When more than two singers took part in a
tenson, it became a tournament. The sirvente was a song of war or
politics, sometimes satirical, sometimes in praise of the exploits of a
generous patron. The sixtine contained six stanzas of six lines each,
with the rhymes holding over from one stanza to the next, and occurring
in a different order in each stanza. The rhymes in the sirvente differed
from what we consider correct by consisting always of a repetition of
the same word. The discord was a sort of free fantasia, sometimes in
several dialects. The pastorelle was of pastoral character, usually
consisting of short lines and containing a dialogue.

Among the more narrative forms are found the ballad, more especially
favoured by the Trouvères, or minstrels of the "Langue d'oil" regions.
It gave rise to the various metres used in the epics, and sometimes
formed the basis of these longer works. In general, the Trouvères
devoted themselves to fiction and story, while their southern brethren
sang of love. The novel, used largely in the south, was a short poem
containing some brilliant anecdote of gallantry, couched in neat phrase.
The romance, or long narrative, was by reason of its size the most
permanent of all the poetry of this age. Though written by both
Troubadours and Trouvères, the latter were far superior in style and
invention, and it is mostly their work which has survived. These
romances were sometimes in prose, but more often in poetry of extremely
smooth and flowing metre.

The romances grouped themselves in three principal cycles,--first, the
Carlovingian, including the stories of Charlemagne, of Roland and the
twelve peers, of Fierabras, and so on; second, the Arthurian, dealing
with the legends of the Round Table; and third, the Alexandrian,
containing tales of antiquity, chiefly of Alexander the Great. In the
first group, "Brut d'Angleterre" contains the mythical story of all the
early English kings. It was adapted from lower Brittany by Robert Wace.
A Saxon Trouvère continued this to his own time, imbuing his work with
thorough hatred of the Normans. Walter Map, Archdeacon of Oxford under
Henry II., wrote many Arthurian tales, while Chrétien de Troyes wrote
the greater part of "Sir Perceval de Galles" in Norman-French. "Floriant
and Florete" is another Arthurian tale, while "Aucassin and Nicolette,"
of unknown authorship, is a charming romance of love in Southern France
and captivity among the Saracens.

The life of the Troubadour forms a pleasing picture in the book of
mediæval history. He was essentially a gentleman by birth, scorning to
take pay for his songs, and often distributing the gifts he received
among his servants. He had to maintain a large retinue, and give
sumptuous entertainments, with the result that he often used up his
entire patrimony. The usual course in such cases was a trip to Palestine
with the Crusaders, and a gallant death in battle with the infidel. But
before reaching that end, his career must have been decidedly pleasant.
He would pass the winter in his castle, training himself in feats of
arms and in musical composition. At the advent of spring, he would issue
forth, followed by a train of Jongleurs singing his songs, and proceed
through field and wood to the nearest castle. Here in the evening a
great feast would be arranged, with the Jongleurs in a special
minstrels' gallery. Next day there would be music on the ramparts, or in
fair weather brocade carpets would be spread in the meadows, and knights
and ladies would listen to more songs. Here the Troubadour himself at
times deigned to perform, thus affording his hearers an unusual
privilege. Here, too, the women had a chance to show their own skill;
for, if there were no woman Trouvères, there were plenty who were well
able to hold their own in the shorter forms of the Troubadours.

That kings and princes did not disdain to become Troubadours is proved
by the example of Richard of England and the Dauphin of Auvergne. But it
is more unexpected to find a queen among their ranks, and that no less a
queen than Eleanor, wife of Henry II. of England. Her grandfather,
William of Poitou, was one of the earliest patrons of the art, and she
inherited his tastes. Her career, like his, is one of boldness and
adventure. When wife of Louis VII., before her marriage with Henry, she
set an example to chivalry by going to the Crusades with that French
king, and not in the capacity of wife, but rather as an Amazon warrior.
She gathered around her a troupe of kindred spirits, and, equipped in
the most graceful array that armourers and milliners could devise,
started off at the head of her husband's knights. Her campaign was
conducted on principles of pleasure rather than of strategy. In Asia
Minor, where she led the van during the march, she chose her route
according to the beauty of the landscape rather than safety of position,
and more than once brought the army into grave danger. She varied the
monotony of the advance by several romantic love episodes, notably with
a young emir in the train of the Sultan Noureddin. She conducted her
career in much the same style as the light opera heroine of to-day, who
pauses in the midst of the action to sing a song, pursue an amour, or
bask in the favour of all beholders.

[Illustration: ELEANOR OF AQUITAINE]

Chief among her admirers was Bernard de Ventadour, whose verse has
received high praise from the poet Petrarch. Of humble birth, he won the
interest of the viscount of the castle, who gave him a good education.
In those days this training consisted in knowing how to be courteous and
well behaved, and how to compose a song and sing it. Bernard, after
exercising his growing powers on the beauties of spring, the fragrance
of flowers, and the music of the nightingale, turned his attentions to
the charms of the young viscountess, which he sung with such success
that one day the object of his praises, in a fit of rapture, bestowed a
kiss upon him. Enraptured by this, he sang his eulogies with still more
boldness, until he roused the jealousy of the lord of the castle, who
locked up his young spouse, and drove the Troubadour from the district.
He took refuge at the court of Eleanor, for whom he conceived a second
and more passionate adoration, and whom he followed to England. But
Henry was either more indulgent or more indifferent, and no further
quarrels came.

The atmosphere of refinement brought into the rude life of the castle by
the Troubadours is more than offset by the domestic infelicity they
caused. Each of these knight-errants of literature was supposed to
choose a lady-love, and it made no difference if she were already
married. Thus conjugal fidelity was at a very low ebb, while amorous
intrigues were openly encouraged by what amounted to a definite system
of civilization. To settle the many vexed questions arising from this
state of affairs, the Courts of Love were formed, at which noble ladies
decided all disputed points. Most famous of these courts was that of
Queen Eleanor herself, while among the others were those of the ladies
of Gascony, the Viscountess of Narbonne, the Countess of Champagne, and
the Countess of Flanders. Disputes before these courts usually took the
form of the tenson, or contention, already described.

Many are the legendary accounts of the laws upon which these courts
based their decisions. There are fables of knights riding in magic
forests and finding scrolls attached by golden chains to the necks of
fiery dragons, or the feet of fleet birds. These laws, if not applicable
in our present civilization, show in the most interesting fashion how
the subject of love was regarded in the twelfth century. Among them are
found the following startling statements:

"Marriage cannot be pleaded as an excuse for refusing to love."

"A person who cannot keep a secret can never be a lover."

"No one can really love two people at the same time," says one rule; but
another adds, "Nothing prevents one lady being loved by two gentlemen,
or one gentleman by two ladies."

Two years was the required period of mourning for a dead lover. But such
constancy may not have been demanded in the case of the living, for,
according to rule, "A new love-affair banishes the old one completely."

Lovers in those days were expected to show the most definite symptoms of
their malady; for, according to law, "Every lover is accustomed to grow
pale at the sight of his lady-love;" "At the sudden and unexpected
prospect of his lady-love, the heart of the true lover invariably
palpitates;" and "A real lover is always the prey of anxiety and
_malaise_." Also, "A person who is the prey of love eats little and
sleeps little."

There are many maxims on the best way of keeping true love alive, and
many more on the subject of jealousy. That the love of the Troubadours
was none too permanent is indicated by the statement, "A moderate
presumption is sufficient to justify one lover in entertaining grave
suspicions of the other."

Among the celebrated decisions is one given by the Countess of Champagne
upon the question, "Can real love exist between married people?" Basing
her decision on the fact that love implies a free granting of all
favours, while marriage enforces constraint, the fair arbiter decided
for the negative. Another decree, of wider application, was pronounced
by Queen Eleanor. A lover, after entreating his lady's favour in vain,
sent her a number of costly presents, which she accepted with much
delight. Yet even after this tribute to her charms, she remained
obdurate, and would not grant him the slightest encouragement. He
accordingly brought the case before the Court of Love, on the ground
that the lady, by accepting his presents, had inspired him with false
hopes. Eleanor gave the decision wholly in his favour, saying that the
lady must refuse to receive any gifts sent as love-tokens, or must make
compensation for them. The story does not tell whether the lady in
question accepted the suitor or returned the gifts.

The absurdity to which these laws were carried is shown by another
decision of Eleanor's. A gentleman became deeply smitten with a lady who
had given her love to another, but who would have been pleased to return
his devotion if ever deprived of her first lover. Soon after, the
original pair were married. The gentleman, citing the decision that real
love cannot exist between married people, claimed that the lady was now
free to reward his fidelity. The lady declared that she had not lost the
love of her first suitor by marrying him, but Queen Eleanor upheld the
decision cited, and ordered the lady to grant her new lover the favours
he desired.

The Troubadours at times treated subjects far different from the usual
short lyrics or long romances. Many of these minstrels performed the
unusual task of setting the laws in poetic form. It is not unusual to
find lawyers becoming good poets, but in this case the legal minstrels
drew from the codes of their native land enough inspiration for long
effusions. Moral and religious precepts, too, were often put in the form
of lengthy poems. Of even greater interest to the student of old customs
are the so-called "Essenhamens," or collections of rules for behaviour
for young ladies. In one of these, by Amanieus des Escas, called the
god of love, the poet gives his counsel to a young lady in the train of
some great countess. He meets her in one of her walks, whereupon she
addresses him and asks for certain rules to guide her conduct. The poet,
after apologetically insisting that she must know more about it, having
ten times as much common sense as he has, overcomes his scruples, and
proceeds to pour forth much undiluted wisdom.

From his verses we learn to approve of the well-known system of early
rising and early retiring, with many minor points about washing,
dressing, caring for the teeth and nails, and other mysteries of the
toilet. Then follow rules for behaviour in church, with directions to
preserve a quiet demeanour, and avoid improper use of the eyes or the
tongue. From the church the writer conducts his pupil to the
dinner-table, reciting many important details in carving, passing the
dishes properly, and performing the correct ablutions. He closes this
episode with the excellent advice that no harm can come from tempering
wine with water. After this comes the conversation in the drawing-room,
and many naïve methods of raising interesting discussions are suggested.

Less highly gifted than the Troubadours were the Jongleurs, who composed
their retinue. These musical jacks-of-all-trades began as accompanists,
singing the songs of their master at the castles he visited. But soon
they grew numerous and independent, and occupied a station varying from
that of our public entertainers to that of the humblest street musician.
Nothing came amiss to them,--singing, playing all instruments, dancing,
imitating the calls of animals and birds, and even the juggling that has
derived its name from them. In the wandering life that they led, they
were often forced to take their wives and children along, and thus women
grew accustomed to take some part in the performances.

The glee-maidens were essentially an English institution, and no doubt
they were more sure of courtesy and protection in that country than on
the Continent. They were by far the most romantic figures of the
minstrel world. Often they would wander about the country alone and
unguarded, braving or avoiding the dangers of the road. Sometimes their
only escort was a pet dog or a goat. They arrayed themselves in small
garments of bright colours, often adorned with silver, while on their
feet were leather buskins. They were at home in the courtyards of
castles and monasteries no less than in the midst of villages and towns,
and, mounting on some slight knoll, they would entertain gentles and
commoners with voice and violin. They are often introduced into the
romances of early England, and many famous glee-maidens are found on the
pages of history. One of the most celebrated was Adeline, who lived in
the time of William the Conqueror, and was successful enough to be
rewarded by him with an estate.

In the reign of Henry III. we find one really great figure among the
glee-maidens,--Marie de France. She was the _Jongleuse_ of William
Longsword, son of Henry II. and Fair Rosamond, and he certainly deserves
the gratitude of the literary world for discovering and fostering her
wonderful talent. Born probably in Brittany, her life and works
identified her with the English. She was familiar with the Breton
tongue, and also with Latin. Her first production was a set of lays in
French verse, that met with instant popularity throughout England. The
courts of the nobles reëchoed with her praises, and ladies as well as
knights were never weary of listening to her songs. Twelve of them are
now in the British Museum, among them a beautiful one dealing with King
Arthur and the Round Table. These works are of rare charm, no less for
their pleasing style and depth of feeling than for their simplicity of
expression and clearness of narrative. Her second effort was a poetical
rendering of many of Æsop's fables, done either as a favour or a
tribute of love for her protector. This was followed by a translation of
the Purgatory of St. Patrick in Ireland, taken from the Latin.

Few of the glee-maidens were so richly gifted or so highly placed as
Marie. Most of them travelled about, either alone or in the company of
glee-men, and were content with more ordinary compositions. At times
they were accompanied by dancing bears, who went through their figures
with the maidens, while the glee-men played, and tripped a fantastic
toe, if not exactly a light one.

The existence of the Jongleurs gradually undermined that of the
Troubadours, as the former grew more and more proficient. In the
thirteenth century we find Guirant Riquier, often called the last of the
Troubadours, requesting King Alfonso X. of Castile to make a definite
classification of Jongleurs, and title the best, thus preventing the
indiscriminate mixing of high and low musicians in the public mind. The
king made some effort to do so, but met with little success, for the
whole institution was gradually decaying. A more tragic fate awaited the
Troubadours of Provence, the home of the art. Espousing the cause of the
Albigenses, they used their wit with such telling effect that they
brought down upon themselves the deadly hatred of the Papists; and in
the short but bloody war that followed, they were almost wholly
exterminated in the cruel slaughter caused by the forces of religious
intolerance. Don Pedro of Aragon, who came to aid his brother
Troubadours, met with defeat and death, and after his loss the victors
started on a career of cruelty, torture, and indiscriminate murder. The
castles of the minstrel knights, once the home of beauty and song, were
razed to the ground, and the Troubadours were blotted from the page of
history.




CHAPTER III.

WIVES OF THE COMPOSERS


Among the women who have influenced music without actually creating it,
none have had greater chances to use their power than the wives of the
famous composers. Often they have been endowed with no inconsiderable
musical genius themselves, but have sacrificed their claim to renown
upon the altar of domestic duty. Sometimes, in rare instances, they have
had the ability to perform the double task of caring for the household
and continuing their own musical labours. Their story is an interesting
one, and from the time of the great John Sebastian Bach, who stands as a
model of domestic purity, down even to the present day, they have played
a large part in shaping the musical destinies of the world.

From the twelfth to the seventeenth century is a long gap, and music
underwent many changes during this period. After the passing of the
minstrel knights, popular music fades out of sight. That it had an
existence, however, is amply proven. The Jongleurs must have continued
long after their masters were stamped out, for their direct successors
are with us to-day, and our hand-organ is the descendant of their
fearful and wonderful organistrum. The entire school of English national
music saw its palmiest days during this epoch. Even on the Continent,
the great schools of contrapuntists delighted to show their skill by
employing as their cantus firmus, or chief part, some well-known popular
song, such as "L'Homme Armé," for example.

In Germany, the mantle of the Minnesingers fell upon the guilds of
musical amateurs in the growing commercial cities. Less poetic than
their predecessors, these Mastersingers, as they named themselves, often
took refuge in arbitrary rules and set metrical forms that made a poor
substitute for real inspiration. That there was some genuine poetic
feeling and humour among them is shown by the work of Hans Sachs, the
greatest of their number. He wrote many poems and plays, of which the
"Fassnachtspiele" were the most popular and the most mirth-provoking.
Contrary to the version of his life given in Wagner's opera, he
succeeded in making a second marriage late in life; and contrary to the
general experience in such cases, the marriage was a happy one, for his
young wife was exceedingly proud of her famous husband. But in the
actual creative work of the Mastersingers woman played no part.

Sacred music and the science of composition flourished as never before.
There is an appropriate saying that old music was horizontal, while now
it is vertical; and the contrast between the interweaving of parts,
proceeding smoothly together, and our single melodies supported by
massive chords, is aptly illustrated by the remark. This very
interweaving led to a style of music that was extremely complex,
affording chances for intellectual and mathematical skill rather than
emotional fervour. It has been customary to say that this style of
composition was unsuited to women, and to pass over the epoch with the
casual remark that no women composers appear within its limits. But
modern research has shown the futility of this statement.

The records of the Netherland schools are meagre, so it is to Italy that
we must turn for the earliest examples of skilled women composers. The
first great name is that of Maddalena Casulana, who was born at Brescia
about 1540. Her published compositions took the shape of two volumes of
madrigals, issued in 1568 and 1583. Next in point of time comes Vittoria
Aleotti, a native of Argenta. Her _magnum opus_ was published at Venice,
in 1593, under the flowery title, "Ghirlanda dei Madrigali a 4 Voci."
Francesca Baglioncella, born at Perugia in the same century, is another
exponent of the art, while Orsina Vizzani, who first saw the light of
day at Bologna in 1593, not only composed many pieces in this form, but
by playing her own and others'[3] works did much to make it popular with
all music-lovers in Italy.

The year 1600 saw the beginning of opera, due to the work of Peri and
his Florentine compeers in trying to--

  "Revive the just designs of Greece."

Among the early operatic composers is found the charming and
accomplished Francesca Caccini, daughter of that Giulio Caccini who was
Peri's friend and most formidable rival. Born at Florence in 1581, and
educated in the most thorough manner, she was for many years the idol of
her native city, not only because of her great talent in singing and
composition, but also on account of the exquisite beauty of her Latin
and Tuscan poetry. Among other musical works by her are two examples of
the new form,--"La Liberazione di Ruggiero" and "Rinaldo
Innamorato,"--both of which are preserved to us. A later composer in the
same field was Barbara Strozzi, whose opera, "Diporti d'Euterpe," was
successfully received at Venice in 1659. In Ricordi's modern collection
of old Italian songs are some charming examples of her skill in other
directions.

In the domain of Italian sacred music, too, the women were not inactive.
Catterina Assandra, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, wrote a
number of religious works, of which "Veni Sancte Spiritus," for two
voices, achieved more than passing fame. Margarita Cozzolani and
Lucrezia Orsina Vezzana, both Catholic sisters, won renown by their
motets and other sacred works. Cornelia Calegari, born at Bergamo in
1644, won the plaudits of her nation by her wonderful singing and
organ-playing, as well as by her many compositions. Her first book of
motets was published in her fifteenth year, and met with universal
success. The highest forms possessed no difficulties for her, and among
her works are several masses for six voices, with instrumental
accompaniment. These names are enough to show that woman was able to
hold her own, even in a period when music had apparently banished those
emotional qualities with which she is said to be most in sympathy.

The women of other countries were not idle in this period of musical
activity. Germany, in spite of her meagre records, can show at least one
great name. Madelka Bariona, who lived during the sixteenth century,
upheld the musical reputation of her country by publishing seven
five-voiced psalms at Altdorf, in 1586. Bernarda Ferreira de Lacerda was
of Portuguese nationality. She won great renown by her writings and her
knowledge of languages. Philip II. of Spain wished to entrust her with
the education of his children, but she declined, alleging as her reason
that she wished to devote all her time to study. Many of her manuscript
compositions and musical writings are preserved in the Royal Library at
Madrid.

France can boast of a real genius in Clementine de Bourges, who was born
at Lyons in the sixteenth century. Such authorities as Mendel and Grove
accord her a rank with the very greatest of her time. She held a high
position among the intellectual leaders of that day, as much by her
great learning as by her musical skill. She shows complete mastery of
many instruments, and her gifts in composition are amply proven by her
four-part chorus, which can be found in J. Paix's organ collection. Her
career was brought to an untimely end by grief. She was engaged to Jean
de Peyrat, a royal officer, who met his death in a skirmish with the
Huguenots in 1560. Her sorrow at this disaster proved incurable, and she
died in the next year.

Although the unfortunate Mary, Queen of Scots, belongs to a more
northern land, the credit of her talents may be fairly accorded to
France, where she received her education. She made no musical attempts
in the more ambitious forms, but wrote many songs, among which "Las! en
mon doux Printemps" and "Monsieur le Provost des Marchands" met with
considerable success in their day.

With the advent of Bach, music was no longer the dry mathematical study
that it had been during the later middle ages, for in his hands it
became imbued with true feeling. Descended from a famous family of
musicians, he was born at the little German town of Eisenach, in 1685.
Receiving his early education at Ohrdruf, he showed himself endowed with
unusual genius. Forced to make his way when fifteen years old, he
supported himself in the Convent School of St. Michael's, at Luneburg,
by means of his musical talents. After a short term as court musician at
Weimar, he became organist of the New Church at Arnstadt, and here he
met the woman who was to be his first wife. Almost the earliest mention
of her is made in a report of the consistory, criticizing the young
organist for certain breaches of discipline. From this report, it
appears that he had asked for four weeks' leave for study, and had
stayed away four months; he had played interludes that the reverend
board considered too long and too intricate; and, on being reproved, he
had made them too short; and once, during the sermon, he had gone forth
and spent these stolen moments in a wine-cellar. The final charge asks
by what authority he has latterly allowed a strange maiden to appear,
and to make music in the choir. This "strange maiden," who made music
with Bach in the solitude of the empty church, was none other than his
cousin, Maria Barbara. A year later (1707) he married her, and took her
to Mühlhausen, where he had found a less troublesome post as organist in
the Church of St. Blasius.

The domestic life of Bach and his wife was a pattern for married couples
of all time. All his friends unite in calling him an especially
excellent "Haus-Vater," a term of commendation applied to those men who
remember their duty to their own families, and do not sacrifice domestic
happiness to fame and fortune. Personally he was pleasant to every one,
mere acquaintances as well as intimate friends, and his house was always
the centre of a lively gathering. With his wife, he took sedulous care
of the education of his children, of whom there were no less than six at
her early death in 1720.

Bach was not the man to remain long a widower, and in the next year the
bereaved composer's fancy lightly turned to thoughts of a second
marriage. His choice fell upon Anna Magdalena Wulken, a Cöthen court
singer of twenty-one years, and the happy consummation occurred on
December 3d. She was a good musician, and did much to enliven the
domestic circle by her beautiful soprano voice. Not content with merely
taking part in her husband's works, she learned from him to play the
clavier and read figured bass, and rendered him valuable aid by copying
music for him.

Soon after the marriage, Bach and his wife started a manuscript music
book, entitled "Clavier Büchlein von Anna Magdalena Bach, Anno 1720." On
the first page was written a playful denunciation of the melancholy and
hostility to art that were so often inculcated by the Calvinism of that
time. This book and another of the kind, which followed it five years
later, are both preserved in the Royal Berlin Library. In them are a
series of clavier pieces, by Bach, Gerhard, and others; a number of
hymns and sacred songs; one of several humourous song's, describing the
reflections of a smoker; and still others, apparently addressed to his
wife, and giving fresh proofs of his devotion to her. Her portrait was
painted by Cristofori, but disappeared after being in the possession of
one of the sons.

As a result of his second marriage, Bach was blessed with thirteen more
children, six sons and seven daughters. All his children loved him, and
his kindness and sincerity enabled him to retain their respect as well
as their affection. In all his activity he was never too busy to save
some time for the family circle, where, in later life, he would take the
viola part in the concerted music that cheered his domestic hearth. It
is sad to think of the poor wife's fate in contrast with so much family
happiness. After Bach's death, in 1750, she struggled bravely to support
her children, but became gradually poorer, and was forced to end her
days in an almshouse, and be buried in a pauper's grave.

Less happy than Bach in his married life was Franz Josef Haydn. After a
boyhood of poverty and struggles, he obtained a position as
Kapellmeister to a Bohemian nobleman, Count Morzin. This post was none
too lucrative, however, for it brought the composer only about one
hundred dollars a year, while his teaching could not have provided him
with much extra wealth, and his compositions brought him nothing. Yet
his financial troubles did not deter him from seeking those of
matrimony, in spite of the fact that Count Morzin never kept married men
in his service. According to the poet Campbell, marriage looks like
madness in nine cases out of ten; and Haydn's venture was certainly no
exception.

The one upon whom the composer's affections lighted was the younger
daughter of a barber named Keller. He had met her while a choir-boy in
the Church of St. Stephen, at Vienna, and she had afterward become one
of his pupils. For some unexplained reason,--let us hope it was not
because of the young composer's love,--she took to the veil, and
renounced the wickedness and the marriages of the world. The barber,
possibly hoping to lighten the suitor's disappointment, and very
probably wishing to have both daughters off his hands, promptly
suggested to the young lover that he take the elder sister instead.
Apparently realizing that marriage at best is but a lottery, Haydn
accepted the proposition.

The wedding took place at St. Stephen's, on November 26, 1760. Whether
Count Morzin would have made an exception in Haydn's case, and retained
him in spite of this event, there is no means of telling, for that
nobleman met with financial reverses, and was forced to give up his
musical establishment. Fortunately for the young genius, some of his
works had been heard and admired by the Prince Paul Esterhazy, who
showed his musical discernment by taking Haydn into his service and
becoming a lifelong patron of the composer.

There was little real affection between Haydn and his wife at the start
of their life journey together. He declared, however, that he really
began to have some feeling for her, and would have come to entertain
still warmer sentiments toward her if she had behaved at all reasonably.
But unfortunately, she did not seem to be capable of behaving
reasonably. The wives of great men are usually proud of the attainments
of their husbands, and take no pains to conceal this fact. But the
barber's daughter of Vienna was totally lacking in any real appreciation
of her gifted consort. As Haydn himself observed once, it would have
made no difference if he had been a shoemaker instead of an artist. She
used his manuscript scores as curl-papers and underlays for the family
pastry; she made continual use of the conjugal privilege of going
through his pockets and abstracting the cash; and once, when he was in
London, her calm selfishness rose to the point of asking him to buy a
certain house, which she admired, so that she might have a home provided
for her widowhood.

Through all his troubles, Haydn preserved a dignified silence about his
domestic unhappiness, and in his letters it is mentioned only twice. For
a long time he bore the trials patiently, but at length was forced to
give up the household and live apart from his domestic tormentor. The
woman who had hoped for a permanent home in her widowhood ended her
lonely existence in 1800, nine years before the close of her husband's
career.

With these facts in view, it is not surprising to find that Haydn at
times sought elsewhere the consolation he was denied at home. He was
fond of feminine companions, especially when they were well endowed with
personal attractions. He must have possessed ingratiating manners, for
he certainly could not boast of great personal attractions, and he
himself admitted that his fair admirers were, "At any rate, not tempted
by his beauty." His natural tenderness showed itself in a passionate
fondness for children,--a blessing denied to his own home.

One of his most violent friendships had for its object a young Italian
singer of nineteen, Luigia Polzelli. Apparently she was not happy with
her husband, and a bond of mutual sympathy drew the composer to her.
After the death of her husband, she persuaded Haydn to sign a promise to
marry her if his wife should die, but the composer afterward repudiated
the agreement, very likely not wishing to repeat his first matrimonial
blunder.

Another romance is found in the love-letters sent to the composer by a
charming London widow named Schroeter. Without overstepping the bounds
of propriety, he was able to draw some profit from this episode, for he
gave lessons to his fair admirer, and allowed her to do manuscript
copying for him. Apparently the friendship was more of her seeking than
of his own, as her letters to him bear witness. These are copied neatly
in one of his note-books, along with various amusing "Anectods," a
description of a London fog, "thick enough to be spread on bread," and
an excellent receipt for making the Prince of Wales's punch.

Mozart was another musical genius who was forced to accept as second
choice the sister of his first love, though in his case the results
were not so disastrous as with Haydn. It was in Mannheim, on the way to
Paris, that Mozart made the acquaintance of the copyist Weber, and
succumbed to the charms of his daughter, Aloysia. But Leopold Mozart,
wisely playing the rôle of stern father, soon sped the susceptible youth
on his way to the French capital. It is a French proverb that tells
us,--

  "Nous revenons toujours
   À nos premiers amours,"--

and a year later he returned. But Aloysia, now famous by her singing,
soon made it plain that his affection was no longer returned. Mozart
seems to have borne the blow well, and soon after her marriage to the
actor Lange, who proved a jealous husband, he wrote home his decision to
wed her younger sister, Constance. After much opposition from members of
both families, he carried out his intention.

As in Haydn's case, the young couple were forced to live on "bread and
cheese and kisses," with none too much of the first two articles.
Mozart, more than any other composer, met with undeserved hardships. On
every side his music was praised and his genius admired, but nobles and
princes, and even the emperor, would give him no material aid. He made a
devoted husband, and much of the money that disappeared so readily from
his hands was probably used for the benefit of his wife, whose health
was not of the best. Their life (in Vienna at first) was a continual
effort to solve the old vexed problem of making both ends meet, and
Constance must be given high praise for the wonderful skill with which
she managed the small and uncertain income of her husband. Several times
the young couple were brought face to face with the direst need, but
their patience and cheerfulness carried them through the crisis. On one
occasion, when there was no fuel on hand and no money to buy any, a
visitor found the pair busily engaged in waltzing about their bare room
in order to keep warm. At another time they were rescued from their
extremity only by the kindness of their friend, the Baroness
Waldstätten, who intervened just in time to save them from beggary.
After three years, Leopold Mozart relented enough to visit his
daughter-in-law, whom he found far more deserving than he had expected;
but he himself was not well off, and could be of little financial help.

That Constance was of great aid to her husband, in spite of an
easy-going nature, cannot be doubted. She possessed the faculty of
telling interesting stories and novelettes, and with this apparently
inexhaustible fund of invention she would amuse him between his periods
of work. The description that we have of the composition of the great
"Don Giovanni" overture gives a pleasing illustration of this phase of
the family life. Owing to rehearsals and other work, the day before the
performance arrived with no overture yet written. In the evening,
according to his custom, Mozart began the task by sketching out the
themes and a general plan of construction for the work. Near him sat his
wife, ready to entertain him with her pleasing tales when he looked up
from his work. For one or two hours he did indulge in actual repose; but
all through the rest of the night he continued the work, relieving his
mental concentration by listening to the storiettes or occasionally
sipping a glass of his favourite punch. The manuscript was completed and
ready for the copyist the next morning at seven o'clock, and along with
the other numbers scored a complete success in the evening.

Some blame has attached to Constance for the lack of exact knowledge
about Mozart's grave. At the hour of his burial, in the public cemetery,
a violent storm drove away all the mourners. There was a cholera scare
in Vienna at the time, which kept many people away from the graveyard.
Her own neglect of the matter may have been caused by illness, but,
whatever the reason, the fact remains that when public interest was
aroused the exact location of Mozart's grave could no longer be defined.

The life of Carl Maria von Weber was tinged in its earlier years with
the romance that seemed to pervade all phases of life in his native
country. Germany had just passed through one of her rare but regular
periods of national awakening, and every one was full of a keen spirit
of patriotic originality in life, letters, and art, as well as in music.
Gifted with unusual talents, trained in the paternal hope of his
becoming a boy prodigy like Mozart, and urged by the need of making his
own career, he soon made a name for himself by his personal charms as
well as his talents. A welcome guest in the homes of aristocracy and
cultivation, he possessed a roving disposition and a spirit of adventure
that made his life not unlike that of the early Troubadours.

It was in Vienna that he met his future wife. Being given charge of the
opera at Prague, he journeyed to the Austrian capital for the purpose of
engaging singers, and among them brought back the talented Caroline
Brandt. He soon wished to enter into closer relations with this singer,
but found obstacles in the way of marriage. She was unwilling to
sacrifice at once a career that was winning her many laurels, and she
did not wholly approve of the wandering life that the gifted young
manager had led up to the time of their meeting. We find him
discontented with this situation, and travelling about in search of a
better and more important post; and during one of these trips he
received a letter from Caroline, saying that they had better part. This
brought forth the accusation from the embittered Weber that "Her views
of high art were not above the usual pitiful standard, namely, that it
was but a means of procuring soup, meat, and shirts." There can be no
doubt, however, that her influence was of the utmost value in steadying
his efforts.

When Weber was once back in Prague, her real love for him overcame all
scruples, and she showed herself ready to wait until he should attain a
post of sufficient value to permit their marriage. After putting the
Prague opera on a stable basis, he looked about for a long time in vain,
until finally he obtained a life position as conductor in Dresden. At
last he was able to return to Prague and marry his faithful Caroline,
with the certainty of being able to provide her a home. The newly wedded
pair made a triumphant concert tour, and settled down to a life of
domestic felicity in Dresden. It can hardly be said that Weber lived
happily ever afterward, for he found many troubles in connection with
his new post. But his married life was such a constant source of joy to
him that he felt always inspired with fresh energy to overcome all
difficulties. It was during his married career that he won those immense
popular successes, with "Der Freischütz," "Euryanthe," and "Oberon,"
that gave the most brilliant lustre to a name already immortal. The last
opera took him to London, away from his beloved family. Aware of his
failing health, he made every effort to reach home, but that boon was
denied him, and he died without another view of those who would have
been anxious to soothe his last moments.

Ludwig Spohr was another composer who possessed a musical wife. He came
of a musical family, his father being a flutist, while his mother played
the piano and sang. Ludwig took up the violin at five years of age, and
at six was able to take part in concerted music. His compositions began
at about the same time. After a youth of earnest study, long practice,
and successful tours, he finally became leader in the band of the Duke
of Gotha. It was there that he met Dorette Scheidler, the famous
harpist, whom he afterward married. Her influence is seen in his later
compositions, for he wrote for her a number of sonatas for harp and
violin, as well as a good many harp solos. The musical pair went on many
tours, always sharing the honours of the performances.

Still more evident is the influence of woman upon music in the case of
Hector Berlioz. This great genius, born in 1803, was the son of an opium
eater, and the morbid character of most of his works may be traced to
this cause. Berlioz studied at the Paris Conservatoire, but his
sensational style did not win favour with the classical Cherubini, and
the young man was forced to work against many difficulties. He was even
forbidden at one time to compete for the _Prix de Rome_, and came near
giving up his career in dejection.

On the Parisian stage was a beautiful Irish actress, named Harriet
Smithson, who was performing the plays of Shakespeare. Berlioz at once
fell in love with her, but it was some time before his needy
circumstances allowed him to lay his suit before her. When he did so,
his passion found shape and expression in a great musical work,--the
Symphonic Fantastique.

This is a weird and sinister composition, but very effective. It is in
five movements. The first represents a young man seeing his ideal and
falling in love with her, the object of this sudden affection being
depicted by a tender theme on the violin. This theme pervades the entire
work. In the second movement, which represents a ball, it signifies the
entrance of the fair one. The third movement is called "In the Fields,"
and contains a duet between the two lovers in the guise of a shepherd
and shepherdess. They are portrayed by an English horn and an oboe, the
result being one of the great instrumental dialogues that are sometimes
found in-works of the tone masters. An effective touch is the
introduction of a thunder-storm, after which the English horn begins a
plaintive note of inquiry, but meets with no reply. In the fourth
movement, the young man has slain his love in a fit of jealousy, and is
on his way to execution. Very powerful music expresses the fatal march,
interrupted every now and then by the surging footsteps of the crowd. At
its close, the hero ascends the scaffold; amid a hush, the tender love
theme reappears, but is obliterated by a sudden crash of the full
orchestra, and all is still. Berlioz, however, does not let his hero
rest in the grave, but adds a fifth movement to show him in the infernal
regions. Piccolo and other wild instruments depict the fury of the
demons, a parody on the Dies Iræ follows, and even the tender
love-theme is not spared, but is turned into the most vulgar of waltzes.

This musical love-letter was understood, and Miss Smithson afterward
married the great composer. But, unfortunately, the romance stopped at
this point, and they did not "live happily ever afterward." The actress
was forced by an accident to leave the stage permanently. She and her
husband did not agree well, and were continually at odds. Finally she
took to drink, and a separation soon followed. Berlioz married again,
his second wife being the singer, Mlle. Recio. He outlived her, and in
later life was taken care of by her mother.

The symphony, incidentally, was so successful at its first performance
that a strange-looking man rushed to the platform, saluted the composer,
and sent him a more substantial token in the shape of twenty thousand
francs. The stranger proved to be Paganini, but that famous violinist
was such a miser that the story has been doubted. It is said that he
acted in behalf of an unknown benefactor, but his enthusiasm at the
performance seems to disprove this, and the work possesses just the dark
and sinister character that would appeal to Paganini.

Another composition inspired by the same love episode is the "Romeo and
Juliette" Symphony. Berlioz tried to make all his music tell a story,
and he believed in the theory that tones could be made to represent
ideas in a much greater degree than is usually supposed. The result is
shown in many characteristic passages in his works, an excellent example
being the gentle and melancholy theme that typifies Childe Harold in the
symphony of that name. But Berlioz carried his idea to extremes, and
fairly earned the half-reproach of Wagner, who said of him: "He ciphers
with notes." That Berlioz could write with more direct beauty is shown
by his practical joke at the expense of the critics; for he pretended to
unearth an old piece by a certain Pierre Ducré, which they praised
greatly in contrast with his own works, and after they had done their
worst, Berlioz proved that he himself was the mythical Ducré.

Giuseppe Verdi was another great musician who felt the full richness of
domestic happiness, if only for a time. Born in the little hamlet of Le
Roncole in 1813, he proved himself possessed of unusual talent, and
after a time went to Busseto for lessons. There he came to the notice of
M. Barezzi, who became the friend and patron of the young student. The
story of his being refused at the Milan Conservatory, and afterward
amazing the authorities by his speed in composing fugues, is too well
known to need repetition. After his Milan studies, we find him back at
Busseto, in love with Barezzi's daughter Margherita. The father, unlike
the usual stern parent who repels impecunious musicians, gave his
permission for their union, which took place soon after, in 1836.

In a couple of years he settled down in Milan, with his wife and two
children. Success began to crown his efforts, and his career of opera
composer was well begun, when his domestic happiness came to a complete
end. First one child fell sick and died of an unknown malady, then the
second followed it in a few days, and within two months the bereaved
mother was stricken with a fatal inflammation of the brain. In the midst
of all these misfortunes, Verdi was kept at work by a commission for "Un
Giorno di Regno," which was to be a comic opera! Little wonder that the
wit oozed out of the occasion, and the performance proved a failure. The
despondent Verdi resolved to give up his career altogether, and only by
the insistence of the manager, Merelli, was he finally persuaded to
resume his occupation. In later life he married again, passing a placid
existence on his extensive estates.

The domestic career of Richard Wagner has formed the subject for endless
discussions. His birth, his early studies, his university career, and
his start as a professional musician, all took place in Leipsic. There,
too, he met the famous opera singer, Wilhelmine Schroeder-Devrient,
whose gifts made such an impression on the young composer. It was the
excellence of her acting, as well as her singing, that gave the embryo
reformer his first ideas of the intimate union of drama and music that
is one phase of his later operatic greatness. Many of his leading rôles
were written for her, and as late as 1872 he stated that whenever he
conceived a new character he imagined her in the part.

His work as leader took him first to Magdeburg. The failure of his early
opera, "Das Liebesverbot," put an end to this enterprise, and soon
afterward he appeared as concert leader in Koenigsberg. There he met and
married his first wife, Wilhelmina (or Minna) Planer. Their natures were
different in many respects. While he displayed many of the vagaries of
genius, she was patient and practical, and, if not wholly understanding
the highest side of his nature, she gave up her own career to help him
through his days of poverty and struggle.

The first venture of the wedded pair was at Riga, where Wagner was
engaged for a term to conduct in a new theatre. After this, they took
ship for Paris, and the stormy passage gave Wagner many a suggestion
for his "Flying Dutchman." It was in the French capital that Minna's
domestic qualities were given their most severe trial, for the composer
found little or no chance to produce his own works, and was forced to
gain a precarious living by the commonest musical drudgery. Probably her
constant care and economy were all that turned the scale in favour of
success. At length the Dresden authorities became interested in some of
the earlier operas, and Wagner was liberated from his dependent
position.

The stay in Dresden being cut short by the political troubles of 1848
and 1849, Wagner found a home in Zurich, where his wife soon joined him.
There he wrote or sketched the grand works that came to full fruition in
his later life. After years of exile, he came back to Germany, where his
pursuit of fortune was still in vain, and might have ended in suicide
but for the sudden patronage of his royal admirer, the mad King Ludwig
of Bavaria. It was at this time that the differences in character began
to cause domestic infelicity in the Wagnerian household. Finally the
pair separated, and, although he did not leave Minna in want, yet she
was compelled to pass the last few years of her life in seclusion and
loneliness, while he basked in the favour of royalty, and found the
high position that had so long been denied him. It is usually claimed by
Wagner's most rabid partisans that she was unable to hold her place in
the new surroundings, and that his genius needed a helpmate more in
sympathy with his high ideals. Admitting the truth of these assertions,
the fair-minded critic must accept them as an explanation, at least, of
his conjugal ingratitude, but Minna's faithful performance of duty in
the early days will not allow them to stand as a valid excuse.

Wagner's second marriage with Cosima, daughter of Liszt and divorced
wife of Von Bülow, resulted happily. The devotion of the new helpmate to
the Wagnerian cause has survived the master's death by many years, and
is still witnessed by the musical world. The domestic bliss of their
married life is well shown in the beautiful Siegfried Idyll, which
Wagner composed as a surprise for his wife on their son's birthday.

[Illustration: RICHARD AND COSIMA WAGNER.]

Among living composers gifted with musical wives, the most preëminent is
Richard Strauss. As Clara Schumann could perform her husband's works, so
the wife of Strauss, who is an excellent singer, is at her best when
giving her husband's songs. Like Grieg's wife, she is more successful
than all other singers in this rôle of domestic devotion. She usually
appears with him as accompanist, a position in which he excels, and each
modestly tries to make the other respond to the applause that is sure to
follow their performance.




CHAPTER IV.

CLARA AND ROBERT SCHUMANN


History has never witnessed a more perfect union of two similar natures,
both endowed with rich mental gifts, and each filled with a perfect
sympathy for the other, than the marriage of Robert Schumann and Clara
Wieck. It holds a place in the story of music similar to that occupied
by the romance of Abelard and Heloise in poetry. The lives of both
composers afford an example of the most unselfish devotion and depth of
affection, combined with the highest idealism in an art that poets
themselves have admitted to be even nobler than their own.

[Illustration: MARIE WIECK]

The birth of Clara Wieck, on September 13, 1819, took place at Leipsic.
That city had not yet entered upon the period of musical greatness that
it was soon to enjoy. The day of Beethoven and Schubert was apparently
passing, and only the lighter and more trivial styles of composition
held sway. Her father, however, Friedrich Wieck, was a piano teacher of
extensive reputation and most excellent qualities, and did his best to
raise the standard of the place. From him, and from her mother as well,
the young Clara inherited her innate musical taste. But the maternal
influence was not of long duration, for domestic troubles soon caused
the separation of Wieck and his wife, the latter marrying the father of
Woldemar Bargiel, while the former also entered into a second union,
with Clementine Fechner at Leipsic. A daughter of this second marriage,
Marie Wieck, won some fame as a pianist, but was far surpassed by her
elder half-sister.

Clara did not at first show signs of becoming a child prodigy, but in
her fifth year she gave indications of possessing musical talent, and
her careful father proceeded at once to develop her powers. So
successful were his individual methods that in four years she was able
to play Mozart and Hummel concertos by heart, and ready to sustain her
part in public. Her first appearance was in conjunction with Emilie
Reichold, one of her father's older pupils, with whom she played
Kalkbrenner's variations on a march from "Moses." One important paper of
the time spoke of her success as universal and well deserved, and did
not hesitate to predict a great future for her under her honoured
father's wise guidance.

Wieck has been the subject of much criticism on account of his supposed
harshness and severity. In the matter of Clara's musical training,
however, these charges cannot be sustained, as one of her own letters
will show. "My father has come before the world in an entirely false
light," she writes, "because he took art earnestly, and brought me up to
regard it earnestly. People have no idea how utterly different from the
usual standards must be the whole education and career of any one who
wishes to accomplish something worth while in art. In connection with
artistic development, my father kept the physical development especially
in view also. I never studied more than two hours a day in the earliest
times, or three in later years; but I had also to take a daily walk with
him of just as many hours to strengthen my nerves. Moreover, while I was
not yet grown up, he always took me home from every entertainment at ten
o'clock, as he considered sleep before midnight necessary for me. He
never let me go to balls, as he judged I could use my strength for more
important things than dancing; but he always let me go to good operas.
In many free hours I used to grow enthusiastic over piano arrangements
of operas and other music. One cannot do that when one is tired out.
Besides that, I had, even in earliest youth, intercourse with the most
distinguished artists. They, and not dolls, were the friends of my
childhood, though I was not deprived of the latter. Those people who
have no comprehension of such a serious bringing up ascribed it all to
tyranny and severity, and held my accomplishments, which may indeed have
been more than those of a child, to be impossible unless I had been
forced to study day and night. As a matter of fact, it was wholly my
father's genius for teaching that brought me so far, by cultivation of
the intellect and the feelings united with only moderate practice."

"To my pain," she continues, "I must say that my father has never been
recognized as he deserved to be. I shall thank him during my entire
lifetime for the so-called severities. How would I have been able to
live through a career of art, with all the heavy difficulties that were
laid upon me, if my constitution had not been so strong and healthy
because of my father's care?"

About this time there came upon the scene a youth named Robert Schumann.
Born in 1810, of a family that was literary rather than musical, he had
obtained some knowledge of the art with his father's consent. After the
death of the latter, his mother would not hear of his choosing a
musical career, but insisted on his studying law. This he did at
Heidelberg, in a rather original manner,--taking long walks, reading
Jean Paul's works, and practising piano nearly all day. In the summer he
met Wieck, whom he adopted as a teacher, and in this way he came to know
the learned pedagogue's talented daughter.

Her musical education was now beginning to bear fruit. In the concert
tours that she began soon after her first triumph, she never allowed
herself to be carried away by the fondness of the public for mere
display, but always aimed at something higher. Instead of making a show
of her technical attainments, she consecrated her powers to the cause of
true art. It required great courage to uphold her standard, for she came
upon the scene at a time when only phenomenal playing, bristling with
seemingly unconquerable difficulties, won the public homage and the
public wealth. Herein both she and her future husband showed themselves
actuated by the very highest motives.

Unfortunately for the romantic side of the story, theirs was not a case
of love at first sight. No less than five years after their first
meeting, we find Schumann deeply interested in a certain Ernestine von
Fricken, another pupil of Wieck. It is stated that the beautiful
numbers of the "Carneval" were due largely, if not wholly, to her
inspiration, which at that time reached its highest point.[4] The
letters A, S, C, and H (the German way of notating B) represent the
Bohemian town of Asch, where she was born, and are also the only musical
letters in Schumann's own name. He himself noted this coincidence in a
letter to Moscheles, and built the themes of the various numbers almost
wholly upon them.

However this may be, he certainly had a great admiration for Clara even
in her early years. He took piano lessons of her father, and became for
a time an inmate of their house. He owed much to the teaching, but still
more to the stimulating artistic society of the Wieck family.

In 1829 he left his teacher, and made a final effort to prepare for the
legal career that his mother had planned for him. It was of little
avail, however, for in the next year we find him writing home that his
entire life had been "but a twenty years' strife between poetry and
prose,--or music and law,--and it must now cease." So earnestly did he
plead his case that his mother at last yielded to his wishes, though
with fear and trembling, and the final decision was referred to Wieck.
That artist, who had by this time fully recognized Schumann's great
gifts, gave his decision in favour of music, and the young enthusiast,
after having his affairs duly settled, returned to Leipsic and devoted
himself altogether to art.

It is probable that he would have given himself wholly to the career of
a successful pianist, but for an accident. After a year of painstaking
practice, he invented a contrivance by which the weaker fingers were
allowed to gain strength by usage, while the third finger was held back.
This mechanism was altogether too successful, for, after using it some
time, he found his third finger so badly crippled that he was forced to
give up hope of ever winning fame on the concert stage. What seemed a
catastrophe to him has proven a blessing to the world, for, if he had
spent his life in executing the works of others, he would never have had
the leisure to create his own immortal compositions.

Meanwhile Clara was steadily improving her already remarkable powers.
Besides keeping up her playing, she now began regular study in
composition. In later life the two were to labour together in many
pieces, but even at this time Schumann's interest in her work was great,
and in one of his early compositions (Impromptu, Op. 5) we find him
using a theme of hers as the basis of his own piece.

The eleven-year-old girl was now started upon a series of tours by her
father, who wished to give her some idea of the world, and to let the
world gain some knowledge of her attainments. From Dresden he writes
home joyfully to his wife: "It is impossible to describe the sensation
that your two little monkeys from the Leipsic menagerie have made here."
But the fatherly care and wisdom were not lacking, for he continues: "I
am anxious lest the honours and distinctions should have a bad influence
upon Clara. If I notice anything of the sort, then I shall travel
further at once, for I am too proud of her modesty, and would not
exchange it for any decoration in the world." In the next year the
triumphs were continued at Weimar, Cassel, and Frankfurt. After winning
the approval of Spohr and other competent judges who were above all
envy, she proceeded to Paris, where her father had the proud privilege
of exhibiting her talents to Chopin. In Weimar, Goethe took a deep
interest in the wonderful child, and sent his picture to the "Richly
endowed (_Kunstreichen_) Clara Wieck," as a token of the pleasure her
playing had given him.

As the result of her Parisian meeting with Chopin, she became one of
the best interpreters of that master's works, and gave them to the world
in much the same manner that she did those of Schumann soon afterward.
Usually her work in educating the public was successful. But critics are
not all safe guides, and even to-day we find many unmusical men in
responsible newspaper positions, so it is not surprising to find an
occasional misunderstanding occur. In Vienna, for instance, we find the
influential but self-important Rellstab writing that it is "a shame that
she is in the hands of a father who allows such nonsense as Chopin's to
be played." These strictures did not extend to the performance, however,
and the writer does not fail to acknowledge her marked talent. Fétis
bears witness to the "lively sensation" she created on the banks of the
Seine, while along the Danube she won victory on victory. The
aristocracy were eager to admit her to their circle, and the Austrian
Empress named her court virtuoso, an honour never before bestowed on a
foreigner.

Some time before this, she had won the attention and interest of the
young Schumann, if nothing more. He had been at work on a symphony in G
minor (which, by the way, proved a failure and was never published), and
the performance of the first movement in his native Zwickau took place
at a concert given there by Clara, then only thirteen. Even then her
performance was astonishing, and, as Schumann put it, "Zwickau was fired
with enthusiasm for the first time in its life." Schumann was no less
excited than the rest of the town. His letters of that time are full of
expressions that seem to betray a deeper feeling, though he himself did
not become conscious of it until later. "Call her perfection," he writes
to a friend, "and I will agree to it." In a Leipsic tribute, he
inquires: "Is it the gifted child of genius (_Wunderkind_), at whose
stretch of a tenth people shake their heads, but admire? Is it the
hardest of difficulties, which she throws off to the public as if they
were wreaths of flowers? Is it perhaps mere pride, with which the city
looks upon its daughter; or is it because she gives us the most
interesting things of the most recent times with the least delay? I do
not know; but I do feel, simply, that she has the spirit that compels
admiration."

The great poets, too, gave her their tributes of praise. "They
recognized in this inspiring vision," says Liszt, "a true daughter of
their fatherland. They strewed their pearls of song before her, and
glorified this Benjamin of their race, who, gazing about with inspired
glances and wondrous smiles, seemed like a silent Naiad, who felt
herself a stranger in the land of prose."

Meanwhile the love that had been growing in silence between her and
Schumann began to take tangible form. His unspoken passion found
expression in the written rhapsodies addressed to "Chiarina" in his new
music journal, the _Neue Zeitschrift für Musik_. In a more purely
musical manner, his feelings took shape in such works as his
"Daidsbündler" Dances, the "Chiarina" of the Carnival, the F-Sharp Minor
Sonata, the Kreisleriana, the Humoreske, the Novelettes, and the
Nocturnes,--truly an offering of rare beauty, and well worthy to express
the feelings of the inspired lover. They bore witness of his adoration
to all who knew him, and all who were able to listen with understanding
ears. And Clara, too, in spite of high honours and higher friendships,
had already given her heart to the silent man endowed with the deep
spirit of romance and poetry. She was his, in spite of the opposition of
her father, who guarded his treasure with a jealous eye, and would hear
of no marriage unless in the distant future.

It was in 1836 that the two lovers came to an understanding. In the next
summer Schumann made formal mention of his suit to her father. Wieck's
refusal may have been due to his entertaining higher hopes for his now
famous daughter, but at any rate the father found an adequate reason in
the vague and unsubstantial prospects of the young composer. This was a
sad blow, but Schumann tacitly acknowledged its justice, for he soon
began making efforts to better his condition, instead of working only
for the glory of art. Although he tried to resign himself to give Clara
up, he could not do so, and with her consent he left for Vienna in hopes
of giving his music journal a broader field. The effort was not a
success; Schumann found Vienna no less trivial in its tastes than many
other places, and wrote home that people could "gabble and gossip quite
as much as in Zwickau." His sojourn there had one important result in
his discovery of Schubert's beautiful C major Symphony, which he sent to
Mendelssohn for performance at the Leipsic Gewandhaus.

Disappointed in material prospects, he tried to obtain a more honourable
position by getting a Doctor's degree from the University of Jena. "You
know, perhaps, that Clara is my betrothed," he writes to an influential
friend. "Her high rank as an artist has often led me to consider my own
humble position, and, although I know how modest she is, and that she
loves me simply as a man and a musician, still I think it would please
her to have me seek a higher position in the civic sense of the word.
Let me ask you: Is it very hard to get a Doctor's degree at Jena?"
Apparently it was not hard when a man of Schumann's fame applied, for in
another letter he writes: "Everything combined to fill the measure of my
joy. The eulogy is so glorious that I certainly owe you a large share of
thanks for it. It gave me and my friends most sincere pleasure. The
first thing I did was, of course, to send a copy into the north to a
girl who is still a child, and who will dance with glee at the idea that
she is engaged to a Doctor."

But Wieck's refusal to sanction the marriage could not be altered. In
fact, his opposition became even stronger and more determined. Finding
any direct appeal of no avail, Schumann was forced to have recourse to
law, and Wieck was compelled to give reason for his refusal before a
legal tribunal. Although Schumann was not rich, yet he possessed some
income from his paper, and his other work brought him enough reward to
enable him to make a home for Clara. Besides these receipts, he had a
small property that gave him an annual return of 500 thalers, and as he
himself wrote: "We are young, and have hands, strength, and
reputation.... Tell me now if there can be real cause for fear."
Nevertheless the case dragged on, and a nature as sensitive as his must
have been deeply mortified by the legal wrangling and the publicity of
the affair. At last a favourable decision was reached, and after a year
of doubt and suspense the marriage took place on September 12, 1840.

Henceforth their life was one perfect union. There could be no happier
marriage in the world than this one, where a man of creative genius was
mated with a woman gifted with the ability and the wish to interpret his
works earnestly and faithfully. They regarded art from different points,
but with the same ideas and ideals. Both were wholly devoted to all that
was true and noble, and both felt the same antipathy to whatever was
trivial or superficial. Together they moved along the pathway of life;
together they won their laurels. "To admire one or the other was to
admire both," says Liszt, "for, though they sang in different tongues,
their life music made but one noble harmony. The annals of art will
never divide the memory of these two, and their names can never be
spoken separately."

And now Schumann's happiness began to take tangible form and show itself
to the world. Hitherto his compositions had been chiefly for the
pianoforte, but now his genius burst forth in song. Cycle followed cycle
during the next few years, and the fortunate lover sang of his
happiness in strains of such romantic beauty that their charm can never
fade while love and music have power to sway the passions of mankind.
The warm feeling and emotion in the poems of Rückert, of Chamisso, of
Heine, were echoed and intensified by the choicest melodies of the art
that is said to begin its expression where language ends. That Clara had
some direct share in these songs, besides publishing many of her own,
there can be no manner of doubt. She certainly formed their inspiration,
and must have assisted in the task of preparing them.

These works placed Schumann in the foremost rank of song composers, and
he is now held equal to Schubert and Franz in this form, if not actually
the greatest song-writer in the world. Franz is more delicate, Schubert
more simply melodious, but Schumann's songs are endowed with a warm
vigour of strong emotion that has never been equalled. His
contemporaries felt their force, but hardly realized their full power,
for one of the writers on Schumann's own paper accorded them only a
secondary rank. "In your essay on song-writing," the composer replies,
"it has somewhat distressed me that you should have placed me in the
second rank. I do not ask to stand in the first, but I think I have some
pretensions to a place _of my own_." Posterity has been proud to place
him with the foremost.

In other matters besides those relating to art, the marriage was
perfectly happy. Both husband and wife possessed simple domestic tastes,
and both were endowed with the innate modesty that prevented their being
harmed by the continual praise of the world. They lived for each other,
and for their children. He modelled his compositions on lines to suit
her artistic nature, and she threw herself ardently into the task of
giving these works to the world. Her days were spent in winning fame for
him, or in shielding his sensitive and irritable nature from too rude
contact with the world. Now that his life was one of perfect
tranquillity, he withdrew more than ever from intercourse with
strangers, and became wholly absorbed in his domestic felicity and his
creative work. The complete happiness of his married life was bound to
produce its effect on his nature, and not only in the songs, but in the
larger works also, his most beautiful music is due to the inspiring
influences of this part of his life.

After a time his wife was able to entice him from the quiet home (first
in Leipsic, then Dresden, and finally Düsseldorf) that sheltered this
scene of domestic harmony. Sometimes her tours were taken alone, but at
last she was able to draw him with her into the world. In Germany, in
the Netherlands, in Austria, even in Russia, constant triumphs awaited
them. There were a few exceptions, chief among them being Vienna, the
city where Mozart struggled so long in vain, and where Gluck was unable
to produce more than a passing impression by his great operatic reforms.
But nearly all the places they visited offered admiration and incense to
the faithful pair of artists. Through Schumann's genius, that of his
wife was influenced, and Clara Schumann became far greater than Clara
Wieck had ever been. She became a true priestess of art. She did not
rest until she gave the world a clear understanding of the depth of
thought in his great works. She made her fame serve his, and considered
the recognition of his qualities her own reward. Yet it still happened
at times that this recognition came slowly, and in Vienna, as late as
1846, he was spoken of merely as the husband of Clara Wieck, and after
the court concert given by her, some one turned to him with the
question: "Are you musical, too?"

Gradually the perfect happiness was marred by the growing sickness of
Schumann. Always extremely nervous and excitable, he had on one or two
earlier occasions been forced to forego work. In 1851 the disease
became evident again. By degrees his conduct grew more and more
eccentric, and he became a victim of actual delusions. He often insisted
that he heard one particular note, or certain harmonies sounding, or
voices whispering messages of hope or of sorrow. One night the spirits
of Schubert and Mendelssohn seemed to reveal a theme to him, upon which
he tried to complete a set of variations. At times he would work calmly
and sensibly, but one day, in a fit of mental anguish, he left his
house, alone, and threw himself into the Rhine. Rescued by some boatmen,
he went home to experience a few more lucid periods, but insanity
gradually mastered him. His last two years were spent in a private
asylum near Bonn, where he died July 29, 1846. His wife, who had been on
a tour in London, returned just in time to witness his end. He was
buried in Bonn, near the tombs of Beethoven and Schubert.

As widow, Clara Schumann continued faithfully the work of her married
life. Her many tours were still a means of performing her husband's
music, and she was able to know that her life-work was successful in
Germany at least. Soon after his death, the name of Schumann became
immortal, and the very peculiarities of his work were recognized as
essentially national in character. His widow found a home with her
mother in Berlin, where she stayed for four years, and whither she
returned after twelve years in Baden-Baden. In 1878 she became chief
teacher of piano in the school founded by Doctor Hoch at Frankfort, and
there for ten years she lived and worked with the most complete success.
In 1892 she retired from her labours, and on May 19, 1896, her long life
of usefulness came to a quiet end. Five days later she was laid at rest
with her husband in the peaceful little cemetery at Bonn.

In private life, as well as in public performance, her personality
remained one of earnest simplicity and nobility of thought. She was
admired and loved by all who knew her, and when failing health compelled
her to give up her teaching, their affection showed itself in the
substantial form of a large subscription.

Her compositions, according to the foremost critics, are not numerous,
but show the sincerity of purpose that marks all her work. Even her
earliest pieces, chiefly short dance forms for piano, are redeemed from
triviality by interesting rhythms and fresh, almost abrupt, modulations.
They are mostly delicate rather than forceful, with frequent ornaments
and staccato passages that require a light and skilful touch. Among her
later and more serious works, the G minor trio is musicianly and
interesting; the three cadences to Beethoven concertos are charming
examples of their kind, and the preludes and fugues (Op. 16) form an
excellent legato study, and are eminently successful in construction as
well. A piano concerto, Op. 7, dedicated to Spohr, is short and poorly
balanced, the first movement being a single solo leading into the
andante. The later works, especially the songs, show plainly the
influence of her husband's great genius.