subjugated by the Franks, and whose kingdom forms a kind of
partition wall between France and Germany. The Angles and
Saxons entered Britain and reduced it under their sway.
Subsequently, the Normans make their appearance here also.
These countries — previously a part of the Roman empire —
thus experienced the fate of subjugation by the Barbarians. In the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 366
first instance, a great contrast presented itself between the
already civilized inhabitants of those countries and the victors;
but this contrast terminated in the hybrid character of the new
nations that were now formed. The whole mental and moral
existence of such states exhibits a divided aspect; in their inmost
being we have characteristics that point to an alien origin. This
distinction strikes us even on the surface, in their language,
which is an intermixture of the ancient Roman — already united
with the vernacular — and the German. We may class these
nations together as Romanic — comprehending thereby Italy,
Spain, Portugal, and France. Contrasted with these stand three
others, more or less German- speaking nations, which have
maintained a consistent tone of uninterrupted fidelity to native
character — Germany itself, Scandinavia, and England. The last
was, indeed, incorporated in the Roman empire, but was affected
by Roman culture little more than superficially — like Germany
itself — and was again Germanized by Angles and Saxons.
Germany Proper kept itself pure from any admixture; only the
southern and western border — on the Danube and the Rhine —
had been subjugated by the Romans. The portion between the
Rhine and the Elbe remained thoroughly national. This part of
Germany was inhabited by several tribes. Besides the Ripuarian
Franks and those established by Clovis in the districts of the
Maine, four leading tribes — the Alemanni, the Boioarians, the
Thuringians, and the Saxons — must be mentioned. The
Scandinavians retained in their fatherland a similar purity from
intermixture; and also made themselves celebrated by their
expeditions, under the name of Normans. They extended their
chivalric enterprises over almost all parts of Europe. Part of them
went to Russia, and there became the founders of the Russian
Empire; part settled in Northern France and Britain; another
established principalities in Lower Italy and Sicily. Thus a part
of the Scandinavians founded states in foreign lands, another
maintained its nationality by the ancestral hearth.
We find, moreover, in the East of Europe, the great Sclavonic
nation, whose settlements extended west of the Elbe to the
Danube. The Magyars (Hungarians) settled in between them. In
Moldavia, Wallachia and northern Greece appear the Bulgarians,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 367
Servians, and Albanians, likewise of Asiatic origin — left behind
as broken barbarian remains in the shocks and counter- shocks
of the advancing hordes. These people did, indeed, found
kingdoms and sustain spirited conflicts with the various nations
that came across their path. Sometimes, as an advanced guard —
an intermediate nationality — they took part in the struggle
between Christian Europe and unchristian Asia. The Poles even
liberated beleaguered Vienna from the Turks; and the Sclaves
have to some extent been drawn within the sphere of Occidental
Reason. Yet this entire body of peoples remains excluded from
our consideration, because hitherto it has not appeared as an
independent element in the series of phases that Reason has
assumed in the World. Whether it will do so hereafter, is a
question that does not concern us here; for in History we have to
do with the Past.
The German Nation was characterized by the sense of Natural
Totality — an idiosyncrasy which we may call Heart
[Gemüth].28 “Heart” is that undeveloped, indeterminate totality
of Spirit, in reference to the Will, in which satisfaction of soul is
attained in a correspondingly general and indeterminate way.
Character is a particular form of will and interest asserting itself;
but the quality in question [Gemüthlichkeit] has no particular aim
— riches, honor, or the like; in fact does not concern itself with
any objective condition [a “position in the world” in virtue of
wealth, dignity, etc.] but with the entire condition of the soul —
a general sense of enjoyment. Will in the case of such an
idiosyncrasy is exclusively formal Will29 — its purely subjective
Freedom exhibits itself as self-will. To the disposition thus
designated, every particular object of attraction seems important,
for “Heart” surrenders itself entirely to each; but as, on the other
hand, it is not interested in the quality of such aim in the abstract,
it does not become exclusively absorbed in that aim, so as to
pursue it with violent and evil passion — does not go the length
of abstract vice. In the idiosyncrasy we term “Heart,” no such
absorption of interest presents itself; it wears, on the whole, the
appearance of “well-meaning.” Character is its direct opposite.30
This is the abstract principle innate in the German peoples, and
that subjective side which they present to the objective in
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 368
Christianity. “Heart” has no particular object; in Christianity we
have the Absolute Object [i.e., it is concerned with the entire
range of Truth] — all that can engage and occupy human
subjectivity. Now it is the desire of satisfaction without further
definition or restriction, that is involved in “Heart”; and it is
exactly that for which we found an appropriate application in the
principle of Christianity. The Indefinite as Substance, in
objectivity, is the purely Universal — God; while the reception
of the individual will to a participation in His favor, is the
complementary element in the Christian concrete Unity. The
absolutely Universal is that which contains in it all
determinations, and in virtue of this is itself indeterminate.
Subject [individual personality] is the absolutely determinate;
and these two are identical.31 This was exhibited above as the
material content [Inhalt] in Christianity; here we find it
subjectively as “Heart.” Subject [Personality] must then also gain
an objective form, that is, be expanded to an object. It is
necessary that for the indefinite susceptibilty which we designate
“Heart,” the Absolute also should assume the form of an Object,
in order that man on his part may attain a consciousness of his
unity with that object. But this recognition of the Absolute [in
Christ] requires the purification of man’s subjectivity — requires
it to become a real, concrete self, a sharer in general interests as
a denizen of the world at large, and that it should act in
accordance with large and liberal aims, recognize Law, and find
satisfaction in it. — Thus we find here two principles
corresponding the one with the other, and recognize the
adaptation of the German peoples to be, as we stated above, the
bearers of the higher principle of Spirit.
We advance then to the consideration of the German principle
in its primary phase of existence, i.e. the earliest historical
condition of the German nations. Their quality of “Heart” is in
its first appearance quite abstract, undeveloped and destitute of
any particular object; for substantial aims are not involved in
“Heart” itself. Where this susceptibilty stands alone, it appears
as a want of character — mere inanity. “Heart” as purely
abstract, is dulness; thus we see in the original condition of the
Germans a barbarian dulness, mental confusion and vagueness.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 369
Of the Religion of the Germans we know little. — The Druids
belonged to Gaul and were extirpated by the Romans. There was
indeed, a peculiar northern mythology; but how slight a hold the
religion of the Germans had upon their hearts, has been already
remarked, and it is also evident from the fact that the Germans
were easily converted to Christianity. The Saxons, it is true,
offered considerable resistance to Charlemagne; but this was
directed, not so much against the religion he brought with him,
as against oppression itself. Their religion had no profundity; and
the same may be said of their ideas of law. Murder was not
regarded and punished as a crime: it was expiated by a pecuniary
fine. This indicates a deficiency in depth of sentiment — that
absence of a power of abstraction and discrimination that marks
their peculiar temperament [Nichtentzweitseyn des Gemuthes]
— a temperament which leads them to regard it only as an injury
to the community when one of its members is killed, and nothing
further. The blood- revenge of the Arabs is based on the feeling
that the honor of the Family is injured. Among the Germans the
community had no dominion over the individual, for the element
of freedom is the first consideration in their union in a social
relationship. The ancient Germans were famed for their love of
freedom; the Romans formed a correct idea of them in this
particular from the first. Freedom has been the watchword in
Germany down to the most recent times, and even the league of
princes under Frederick II had its origin in the love of liberty.
This element of freedom, in passing over to a social relationship,
can establish only popular communities ; so that these
communities constitute the whole state, and every member of the
community, as such, is a free man. Homicide could be expiated
by a pecuniary mulct, because the individuality of the free man
was regarded as sacred — permanently and inviolably —
whatever he might have done. The community or its presiding
power, with the assistance of members of the community,
delivered judgment in affairs of private right, with a view to the
protection of person and property. For affairs affecting the body
politic at large — for wars and similar contingencies — the
whole community had to be consulted. The second point to be
observed is, that social nuclei were formed by free confederation,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 370
and by voluntary attachment to military leaders and princes. The
connection in this case was that of Fidelity; for Fidelity is the
second watchword of the Germans, as Freedom was the first.
Individuals attach themselves with free choice to an individual,
and without external prompting make this relation an inviolable
one. This we find neither among the Greeks nor the Romans. The
relation of Agamemnon and the princes who accompanied him
was not that of feudal suit and service: it was a free association
merely for a particular purpose — a Hegemony. But the German
confederations have their being not in a relation to a mere
external aim or cause, but in a relation to the spiritual self — the
subjective inmost personality. Heart, disposition, the concrete
subjectivity in its integrity, which does not attach itself to any
abstract bearing of an object, but regards the whole of it as a
condition of attachment — making itself dependent on the person
and the cause — renders this relation a compound of fidelity to
a person and obedience to a principle.
The union of the two relations — of individual freedom in the
community, and of the bond implied in association — is the main
point in the formation of the State. In this, duties and rights are
no longer left to arbitrary choice, but are determined as fixed
relations; — involving, moreover, the condition that the State be
the soul of the entire body, and remain its sovereign — that from
it should be derived particular aims and the authorization both of
political acts and political agents — the generic character and
interests of the community constituting the permanent basis of
the whole. But here we have the peculiarity of the German states,
that contrary to the view thus presented, social relations do not
assume the character of general definitions and laws, but are
entirely split up into private rights and private obligations. They
perhaps exhibit a social or communal mould or stamp, but
nothing universal; the laws are absolutely particular, and the
Rights are Privileges. Thus the state was a patchwork of private
rights, and a rational political life was the tardy issue of
wearisome struggles and convulsions.
We have said, that the Germans were predestined to be the
bearers of the Christian principle, and to carry out the Idea as the
absolutely Rational aim. In the first instance we have only vague
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 371
volition, in the background of which lies the True and Infinite.
The True is present only as an unsolved problem, for their Soul
is not yet purified. A long process is required to complete this
purification so as to realize concrete Spirit. Religion comes
forward with a challenge to the violence of the passions, and
rouses them to madness. The excess of passions is aggravated by
evil conscience, and heightened to an insane rage; which perhaps
would not have been the case, had that opposition been absent.
We behold the terrible spectacle of the most fearful extravagance
of passion in all the royal houses of that period. Clovis, the
founder of the Frank Monarchy, is stained with the blackest
crimes. Barbarous harshness and cruelty characterize all the
succeeding Merovingians; the same spectacle is repeated in the
Thuringian and other royal houses. The Christian principle is
certainly the problem implicit in their souls; but these are
primarily still crude. The Will — potentially true — mistakes
itself, and separates itself from the true and proper aim by
particular, limited aims. Yet it is in this struggle with itself and
contrariety to its bias, that it realizes its wishes; it contends
against the object which it really desires, and thus accomplishes
it; for implicitly, potentially, it is reconciled. The Spirit of God
lives in the Church; it is the inward impelling Spirit. But it is in
the World that Spirit is to be realized — in a material not yet
brought into harmony with it. Now this material is the Subjective
Will, which thus has a contradiction in itself. On the religious
side, we often observe a change of this kind: a man who has all
his life been fighting and hewing his way — who with all
vehemence of character and passion, has struggled and revelled
in secular occupations — on a sudden repudiates it all, to betake
himself to religious seclusion. But in the World, secular business
cannot be thus repudiated; it demands accomplishment, and
ultimately the discovery is made, that Spirit finds the goal of its
struggle and its harmonization, in that very sphere which it made
the object of its resistance — it finds that secular pursuits are a
spiritual occupation.
We thus observe, that individuals and peoples regard that
which is their misfortune, as their greatest happiness, and
conversely, struggle against their happiness as their greatest
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 372
misery. La vérité, en la repoussant, on I’embrasse. Europe
comes to the truth while, and to the degree in which, she has
repulsed it. It is in the agitation thus occasioned, that Providence
especially exercises its sovereignty; realizing its absolute aim —
its honor — as the result of unhappiness, sorrow, private aims
and the unconscious will of the nations of the earth.
While, therefore, in the West this long process in the world’s
history — necessary to that purification by which Spirit in the
concrete is realized — is commencing, the purification requisite
for developing Spirit in the abstract which we observe carried on
contemporaneously in the East, is more quickly accomplished.
The latter does not need a long process, and we see it produced
rapidly, even suddenly, in the first half of the seventh century, in
Mahometanism.
Chapter II Mohametanism.
On the one hand we see the European world forming itself
anew — the nations taking firm root there, to produce a world of
free reality expanded and developed in every direction. We
behold them beginning their work by bringing all social relations
under the form of particularity — with dull and narrow
intelligence splitting that which in its nature is generic and
normal, into a multitude of chance contingencies; rendering that
which ought to be simple principle and law, a tangled web of
convention, In short, while the West began to shelter itself in a
political edifice of chance, entanglement and particularity, the
very opposite direction necessarily made its appearance in the
world, to produce the balance of the totality of spiritual
manifestation. This took place in the Revolution of the East,
which destroyed all particularity and dependence, and perfectly
cleared up and purified the soul and disposition; making the
abstract One the absolute object of attention and devotion, and to
the same extent, pure subjective consciousness — the
Knowledge of this One alone — the only aim of reality; —
making the Unconditioned [das Verhältnisslose] the condition
[Verhält-niss] of existence.
We have already become acquainted with the nature of the
Oriental principle, and seen that its Highest Being is only
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 373
negative; — that with it the positive imports an abandonment to
mere nature — the enslavement of Spirit to the world of realities,
Only among the Jews have we observed the principle of pure
Unity elevated to a thought; for only among them was adoration
paid to the One, as an object of thought. This unity then
remained, when the purification of the mind to the conception of
abstract Spirit had been accomplished; but it was freed from the
particularity by which the worship of Jehovah had been
hampered. Jehovah was only the God of that one people — the
God of Abraham, of Isaac and Jacob: only with the Jews had this
God made a covenant; only to this people had he revealed
himself. That speciality of relation was done away with in
Mahometanism. In this spiritual universality, in this unlimited
and indefinite purity and simplicity of conception, human
personality has no other aim than the realization of this
universality and simplicity. Allah has not the affirmative, limited
aim of the Judaic God. The worship of the One is the only final
aim of Mahometanism, and subjectivity has this worship for the
sole occupation of its activity, combined with the design to
subjugate secular existence to the One. This One has indeed, the
quality of Spirit; yet because subjectivity suffers itself to be
absorbed in the object, this One is deprived of every concrete
predicate; so that neither does subjectivity become on its part
spiritually free, nor on the other hand is the object of its
veneration concrete. But Mahometanism is not the Hindoo, not
the Monastic immersion in the Absolute. Subjectivity is here
living and unlimited — an energy which enters into secular life
with a purely negative purpose, and busies itself and interferes
with the world, only in such a way as shall promote the pure
adoration of the One. The object of Mahometan worship is
purely intellectual; no image, no representation of Allah is
tolerated. Mahomet is a prophet but still man — not elevated
above human weaknesses. The leading features of
Mahometanism involve this — that in actual existence nothing
can become fixed, but that everything is destined to expand itself
in activity and life in the boundless amplitude of the world, so
that the worship of the One remains the only bond by which the
whole is capable of uniting. In this expansion, this active energy,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 374
all limits, all national and caste distinctions vanish; no particular
race, political claim of birth or possession is regarded — only
man as a believer. To adore the One, to believe in him, to fast —
to remove the sense of speciality and consequent separation from
the Infinite, arising from corporeal limitation — and to give alms
— that is, to get rid of particular private possession — these are
the essence of Mahometan injunctions; but the highest meed is
to die for the Faith. He who perishes for it in battle is sure of
Paradise.
The Mahometan religion originated among the Arabs. Here
Spirit exists in its simplest form, and the sense of the Formless
has its especial abode; for in their deserts nothing can be brought
into a firm consistent shape. The flight of Mahomet from Mecca
in the year 622 is the Moslem era. Even during his life, and
under his own leadership, but especially by following up his
designs after his death under the guidance of his successors, the
Arabs achieved their vast conquests. They first came down upon
Syria and conquered its capital Damascus in the year 634. They
then passed the Euphrates and Tigris and turned their arms
against Persia, which soon submitted to them. In the West they
conquered Egypt, Northern Africa and Spain, and pressed into
Southern France as far as the Loire, where they were defeated by
Charles Martel near Tours, A.D. 732. Thus the dominion of the
Arabs extended itself in the West. In the East they reduced
successively Persia, as already stated, Samarkand, and the
Southwestern part of Asia Minor. These conquests, as also the
spread of their religion, took place with extraordinary rapidity.
Whoever became a convert to Islam gained a perfect equality of
rights with all Mussulmans. Those who rejected it, were, during
the earliest period, slaughtered. Subsequently, however, the
Arabs behaved more leniently to the conquered; so that if they
were unwilling to go over to Islam, they were only required to
pay an annual poll-tax. The towns that immediately submitted,
were obliged to pay the victor a tithe of all their possessions;
those which had to be captured, a fifth.
Abstraction swayed the minds of the Mahometans. Their object
was, to establish an abstract worship, and they struggled for its
accomplishment with the greatest enthusiasm. This enthusiasm
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 375
was Fanaticism, that is, an enthusiasm for something abstract —
for an abstract thought which sustains a negative position
towards the established order of things. It is the essence of
fanaticism to bear only a desolating destructive relation to the
concrete; but that of Mahometanism was, at the same time,
capable of the greatest elevation — an elevation free from all
petty interests, and united with all the virtues that appertain to
magnanimity and valor. La religion et la terreur were the
principles in this case, as with Robespierre la liberté et la
terreur. But real life is nevertheless concrete, and introduces
particular aims; conquest leads to sovereignty and wealth, to the
conferring of prerogatives on a dynastic family, and to a union
of individuals. But all this is only contingent and built on sand;
it is to-day, and to-morrow is not. With all the passionate interest
he shows, the Mahometan is really indifferent to this social
fabric, and rushes on in the ceaseless whirl of fortune. In its
spread Mahometanism founded many kingdoms and dynasties.
On this boundless sea there is a continual onward movement;
nothing abides firm. Whatever curls up into a form remains all
the while transparent, and in that very instant glides away. Those
dynasties were destitute of the bond of an organic firmness: the
kingdoms, therefore, did nothing but degenerate; the individuals
that composed them simply vanished. Where, however, a noble
soul makes itself prominent — like a billow in the surging of the
sea — it manifests itself in a majesty of freedom, such that
nothing more noble, more generous, more valiant, more devoted
was ever witnessed. The particular determinate object which the
individual embraces is grasped by him entirely — with the whole
soul. While Europeans are involved in a multitude of relations,
and form, so to speak, “a bundle” of them — in Mahometanism
the individual is one passion and that alone; he is superlatively
cruel, cunning, bold, or generous. Where the sentiment of love
exists, there is an equal abandon — love the most fervid. The
ruler who loves the slave, glorifies the object of his love by
laying at his feet all his magnificence, power and honor —
forgetting sceptre and throne for him; but on the other hand he
will sacrifice him just as recklessly. This reckless fervor shows
itself also in the glowing warmth of the Arab and Saracen poetry.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 376
That glow is the perfect freedom of fancy from every fetter — an
absorption in the life of its object and the sentiment it inspires, so
that selfishness and egotism are utterly banished.
Never has enthusiasm, as such, performed greater deeds.
Individuals may be enthusiastic for what is noble and exalted in
various particular forms. The enthusiasm of a people for its
independence, has also a definite aim. But abstract and therefore
all-comprehensive enthusiasm — restrained by nothing, finding
its limits nowhere, and absolutely indifferent to all beside — is
that of the Mahometan East.
Proportioned to the rapidity of the Arab conquests, was the
speed with which the arts and sciences attained among them their
highest bloom. At first we see the conquerors destroying
everything connected with art and science. Omar is said to have
caused the destruction of the noble Alexandrian library. “These
books,” said he, “either contain what is in the Koran, or
something else: in either case they are superfluous.” But soon
afterwards the Arabs became zealous in promoting the arts and
spreading them everywhere. Their empire reached the summit of
its glory under the Caliphs Al-Mansor and Haroun Al-Raschid.
Large cities arose in all parts of the empire, where commerce and
manufactures flourished, splendid palaces were built, and
schools created. The learned men of the empire assembled at the
Caliph’s court, which not merely shone outwardly with the pomp
of the costliest jewels, furniture and palaces, but was resplendent
with the glory of poetry and all the sciences. At first the Caliphs
still maintained entire that simplicity and plainness which
characterized the Arabs of the desert, (the Caliph Abubeker is
particularly famous in this respect,) and which acknowledged no
distinction of station and culture. The meanest Saracen, the most
insignificant old Woman, approached the Caliph as an equal.
Unreflecting naivete does not stand in need of culture; and in
virtue of the freedom of his Spirit, each one sustains a relation of
equality to the ruler.
The great empire of the Caliphs did not last long: for on the
basis presented by Universality nothing is firm. The great
Arabian empire fell about the same time as that of the Franks:
thrones were demolished by slaves and by fresh invading hordes
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 377
— the Seljuks and Mongols — and new kingdoms founded, new
dynasties raised to the throne. The Osman race at last succeeded
in establishing a firm dominion, by forming for themselves a
firm centre in the Janizaries. Fanaticism having cooled down, no
moral principle remained in men’s souls. In the struggle with the
Saracens, European valor had idealized itself to a fair and noble
chivalry. Science and knowledge, especially that of philosophy,
came from the Arabs into the West. A noble poetry and free
imagination were kindled among the Germans by the East — a
fact which directed Goethe’s attention to the Orient and
occasioned the composition of a string of lyric pearls, in his
“Divan,” which in warmth and felicity of fancy cannot be
surpassed. But the East itself, when by degrees enthusiasm had
vanished, sank into the grossest vice. The most hideous passions
became dominant, and as sensual enjoyment was sanctioned in
the first form which Mahometan doctrine assumed, and was
exhibited as a reward of the faithful in Paradise, it took the place
of fanaticism. At present, driven back into its Asiatic and African
quarters, and tolerated only in one corner of Europe through the
jealousy of Christian Powers, Islam has long vanished from the
stage of history at large, and has retreated into Oriental ease and
repose.
Chapter III. The Empire of Charlemagne.
The empire of the Franks, as already stated, was founded by
Clovis. After his death, it was divided among his sons.
Subsequently, after many struggles and the employment of
treachery, assassination and violence, it was again united, and
once more divided. Internally the power of the kings was very
much increased, by their having become princes in conquered
lands. These were indeed parcelled out among the Frank
freemen; but very considerable permanent revenues accrued to
the king, together with what had belonged to the emperors, and
the spoils of confiscation. These therefore the king bestowed as
personal, i.e. not heritable, beneficia, on his warriors, who in
receiving them entered into a personal obligation to him —
became his vassals and formed his feudal array. The very opulent
Bishops were united with them in constituting the King’s
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 378
Council, which however did not circumscribe the royal authority.
At the head of the feudal array was the Major Domus. These
Majores Domus soon assumed the entire power and threw the
royal authority into the shade, while the kings sank into a torpid
condition and became mere puppets. From the former sprang the
dynasty of the Carlovingians. Pepin le Bref, the son of Charles
Martel, was in the year 752 raised to the dignity of King of the
Franks. Pope Zacharias released the Franks from their oath of
allegiance to the still living Childeric III — the last of the
Merovingians — who received the tonsure, i.e. became a monk,
and was thus deprived of the royal distinction of long hair. The
last of the Merovingians were utter weaklings, who contented
themselves with the name of royalty, and gave themselves up
almost entirely to luxury — a phenomenon that is quite common
in the dynasties of the East, and is also met with again among the
last of the Carlovingians. The Majores Domus, on the contrary,
were in the very vigor of ascendant fortunes, and were in such
close alliance with the feudal nobility, that it became easy for
them ultimately to secure the throne.
The Popes were most severely pressed by the Lombard kings
and sought protection from the Franks. Out of gratitude Pepin
undertook to defend Stephen II. He led an army twice across the
Alps, and twice defeated the Lombards. His victories gave
splendor to his newly established throne, and entailed a
considerable heritage on the Chair of St. Peter. In A.D. 800 the
son of Pepin — Charlemagne — was crowned Emperor by the
Pope, and hence originated the firm union of the Carlovingians
with the Papal See. For the Roman Empire continued to enjoy
among the barbarians the prestige of a great power, and was ever
regarded by them as the centre from which civil dignities,
religion, laws and all branches of knowledge — beginning with
written characters themselves — flowed to them. Charles Martel,
after he had delivered Europe from Saracen domination, was —
himself and his successors — dignified with the title of
“Patrician” by the people and senate of Rome; but Charlemagne
was crowned Emperor, and that by the Pope himself.
There were now, therefore, two Empires, and in them the
Christian confession was gradually divided into two Churches,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 379
the Greek and the Roman. The Roman Emperor was the born
defender of the Roman Church, and this position of the Emperor
towards the Pope seemed to declare that the Frank sovereignty
was only a continuation of the Roman Empire.
The Empire of Charlemagne had a very considerable extent.
Franconia Proper stretched from the Rhine to the Loire.
Aquitania, south of the Loire, was in 768 — the year of Pepin’s
death — entirely subjugated. The Frank Empire also included
Burgundy, Alemannia (southern Germany between the Lech, the
Maine and the Rhine), Thuringia, which extended to the Saale,
and Bavaria. Charlemagne likewise conquered the Saxons, who
dwelt between the Rhine and the Weser, and put an end to the
Lombard dominion, so that he became master of Upper and
Central Italy.
This great empire Charlemagne formed into a systematically
organized State, and gave the Frank dominion settled institutions
adapted to impart to it strength and consistency. This must
however not be understood, as if he first introduced the
Constitution of his empire in its whole extent, but as implying
that institutions partly already in existence, were developed
under his guidance, and attained a more decided and
unobstructed efficiency. The King stood at the head of the
officers of the empire, and the principle of hereditary monarchy
was already recognized. The King was likewise master of the
armed force, as also the largest landed proprietor, while the
supreme judicial power was equally in his hands. The military
constitution was based on the “arrière- ban.” Every freeman was
bound to arm for the defence of the realm, and had to provide for
his support in the field for a certain time. This militia (as it would
now be called) was under the command of Counts and
Margraves, which latter presided over large districts on the
borders of the empire — the “Marches.” According to the
general partition of the country, it was divided into provinces [or
counties], over each of which a Count presided. Over them
again, under the later Carlovingians, were Dukes, whose seats
were large cities, such as Cologne, Ratisbon, and the like. Their
office gave occasion to the division of the country into Duchies:
thus there was a Duchy of Alsatia, Lorraine, Frisia, Thuringia,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 380
Rhaetia. These Dukes were appointed by the Emperor. Peoples
that had retained their hereditary princes after their subjugation,
lost this privilege and received Dukes, when they revolted; this
was the case with Alemannia, Thuringia, Bavaria, and Saxony.
But there was also a kind of standing army for readier use. The
vassals of the emperor, namely, had the enjoyment of estates on
the condition of performing military service, whenever
commanded. And with a view to maintain these arrangements,
commissioners (Missi) were sent out by the emperor, to observe
and report concerning the affairs of the Empire, and to inquire
into the state of judicial administration and inspect the royal
estates.
Not less remarkable is the management of the revenues of the
state. There were no direct taxes, and few tolls on rivers and
roads, of which several were farmed out to the higher officers of
the empire. Into the treasury flowed on the one hand judicial
fines, on the other hand the pecuniary satisfactions made for not
serving in the army at the emperor’s summons. Those who
enjoyed beneficia, lost them on neglecting this duty. The chief
revenue was derived from the crown- lands, of which the
emperor had a great number, on which royal palaces [Pfalzen]
were erected. It had been long the custom for the kings to make
progresses through the chief provinces, and to remain for a time
in each palatinate; the due preparations for the maintenance of
the court having been already made by Marshals, Chamberlains,
etc.
As regards the administration of justice, criminal causes and
those which concern real property were tried before the
communal assemblies under the presidency of a Count. Those of
less importance were decided by at least seven free men — an
elective bench of magistrates — under the presidency of the
Centgraves. The supreme jurisdiction belonged to the royal
tribunals, over which the king presided in his palace: to these the
feudatories, spiritual and temporal, were amenable. The royal
commissioners mentioned above gave especial attention in their
inquisitorial visits to the judicial administration, heard all
complaints, and punished injustice. A spiritual and a temporal
envoy had to go their circuit four times a year.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 381
In Charlemagne’s time the ecclesiastical body had already
acquired great weight. The bishops presided over great cathedral
establishments, with which were also connected seminaries and
scholastic institutions. For Charlemagne endeavored to restore
science, then almost extinct, by promoting the foundation of
schools in towns and villages. Pious souls believed that they
were doing a good work and earning salvation by making
presents to the church; in this way the most savage and barbarous
monarchs sought to atone for their crimes. Private persons most
commonly made their offerings in the form of a bequest of their
entire estate to religious houses, stipulating for the enjoyment of
the usufruct only for life or for a specified time. But it often
happened that on the death of a bishop or abbot, the temporal
magnates and their retainers invaded the possessions of the
clergy, and fed and feasted there till all was consumed; for
religion had not yet such an authority over men’s minds as to be
able to bridle the rapacity of the powerful. The clergy were
obliged to appoint stewards and bailiffs to manage their estates;
besides this, guardians had charge of all their secular concerns,
led their men-at-arms into the field, and gradually obtained from
the king territorial jurisdiction, when the ecclesiastics had
secured the privilege of being amenable only to their own
tribunals, and enjoyed immunity from the authority of the royal
officers of justice (the Counts). This involved an important step
in the change of political relations, inasmuch as the ecclesiastical
domains assumed more and more the aspect of independent
provinces enjoying a freedom surpassing anything to which those
of secular princes had yet made pretensions. Moreover the clergy
contrived subsequently to free themselves from the burdens of
the state, and opened the churches and monasteries as asylums
— that is, inviolable sanctuaries for all offenders. This institution
was on the one hand very beneficial as a protection in cases of
violence and oppression; but it was perverted on the other hand
into a means of impunity for the grossest crimes. In
Charlemagne’s time, the law could still demand from conventual
authorities the surrender of offenders. The bishops were tried by
a judicial bench consisting of bishops; as vassals they were
properly subject to the royal tribunal. Afterwards the monastic
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 382
establishments sought to free themselves from episcopal
jurisdiction also: and thus they made themselves independent
even of the church. The bishops were chosen by the clergy and
the religious communities at large; but as they were also vassals
of the sovereign, their feudal dignity had to be conferred by him.
The contingency of a contest was avoided by the obligation to
choose a person approved of by the king.
The imperial tribunals were held in the palace where the
emperor resided. The sovereign himself presided in them, and the
magnates of the imperial court constituted with him the supreme
judicial body. The deliberations of the imperial council on the
affairs of the empire did not take place at appointed times, but as
occasions offered — at military reviews in the spring, at
ecclesiastical councils and on court-days. It was especially these
court-days, to which the feudal nobles were invited — when the
king held his court in a particular province, generally on the
Rhine, the centre of the Frank empire — that gave occasion to
the deliberations in question. Custom required the sovereign to
assemble twice a year a select body of the higher temporal and
ecclesiastical functionaries, but here also the king had decisive
power. These conventions are therefore of a different character
from the Imperial Diets of later times, in which the nobles
assume a more independent position.
Such was the state of the Frank Empire — that first
consolidation of Christianity into a political form proceeding
from itself, the Roman empire having been swallowed up by
Christianity. The constitution just described looks excellent; it
introduced a firm military organization and provided for the
administration of justice within the empire. Yet after
Charlemagne’s death it proved itself utterly powerless —
externally defenceless against the invasions of the Normans,
Hungarians, and Arabs, and internally inefficient in resisting
lawlessness, spoliation, and oppression of every kind. Thus we
see, side by side with an excellent constitution, the most
deplorable condition of things, and therefore confusion in all
directions. Such political edifices need, for the very reason that
they originate suddenly, the additional strengthening afforded by
negativity evolved within themselves: they need reactions in
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 383
every form, such as manifest themselves in the following period.
Section II: The Middle Ages
While the first period of the German World ends brilliantly
with a mighty empire, the second is commenced by the reaction
resulting from the antithesis occasioned by that infinite falsehood
which rules the destinies of the Middle Ages and constitutes their
life and spirit. This reaction is first, that of the particular
nationalities against the universal sovereignty of the Frank
empire — manifesting itself in the splitting up of that great
empire. The second reaction is that of individuals against legal
authority and the executive power — against subordination, and
the military and judicial arrangements of the constitution. This
produced the isolation and therefore defencelessness of
individuals. The universality of the power of the state
disappeared through this reaction: individuals sought protection
with the powerful, and the latter became oppressors. Thus was
gradually introduced a condition of universal dependence, and
this protecting relation is then systematized into the Feudal
System. The third reaction is that of the church — the reaction
of the spiritual element against the existing order of things.
Secular extravagances of passion were repressed and kept in
check by the Church, but the latter was itself secularized in the
process, and abandoned its proper position. From that moment
begins the introversion of the secular principle. These relations
and reactions all go to constitute the history of the Middle Ages,
and the culminating point of this period is the Crusades; for with
them arises a universal instability, but one through which the
states of Christendom first attain internal and external
independence.
Chapter I. The Feudality and the Hierarchy.
The First Reaction is that of particular nationality against the
universal sovereignty of the Franks. It appears indeed, at first
sight, as if the Frank empire was divided by the mere choice of
its sovereigns; but another consideration deserves attention, vis.
that this division was popular, and was accordingly maintained
by the peoples. It was, therefore, not a mere dynastic act —
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 384
which might appear unwise, since the princes thereby weakened
their own power — but a restoration of those distinct
nationalities which had been held together by a connecting bond
of irresistible might and the genius of a great man. Louis the
Pious [le Débonnaire] son of Charlemagne, divided the empire
among his three sons. But subsequently, by a second marriage,
another son was born to him — Charles the Bald. As he wished
to give him also an inheritance, wars and contentions arose
between Louis and his other sons, whose already received
portion would have to be diminished by such an arrangement. In
the first instance, therefore, a private interest was involved in the
contest; but that of the nations which composed the empire made
the issue not indifferent to them. The western Franks had already
identified themselves with the Gauls, and with them originated
a reaction against the German Franks, as also at a later epoch one
on the part of Italy against the Germans. By the treaty of Verdun,
A.D. 843, a division of the empire among Charlemagne’s
descendants took place; the whole Frank empire, some provinces
excepted, was for a moment again united under Charles the
Gross. It was, however, only for a short time that this weak
prince was able to hold the vast empire together; it was broken
up into many smaller sovereignties, which developed and
maintined an independent position. These were the Kingdom of
Italy, which was itself divided, the two Burgundian sovereignties
— Upper Burgundy, of which the chief centres were Geneva and
the convent of St. Maurice in Valaise, and Lower Burgundy
between the Jura, the Mediterranean and the Rhone — Lorraine,
between the Rhine and the Meuse, Normandy, and Brittany.
France Proper was shut in between these sovereignties; and thus
limited did Hugh Capet find it when he ascended the throne.
Eastern Franconia, Saxony, Thuringia, Bavaria, Swabia,
remained parts of the German Empire. Thus did the unity of the
Frank monarchy fall to pieces. The internal arrangements of the
Frank empire also suffered a gradual but total decay; and the first
to disappear was the military organization. Soon after
Charlemagne we see the Norsemen from various quarters making
inroads into England, France and Germany. In England seven
dynasties of Anglo-Saxon Kings were originally established, but
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 385
in the year 827 Egbert united these sovereignties into a single
kingdom. In the reign of his successor the Danes made very
frequent invasions and pillaged the country. In Alfred the Great’s
time they met with vigorous resistance, but subsequently the
Danish King Canute conquered all England. The inroads of the
Normans into France were contemporaneous with these events.
They sailed up the Seine and the Loire in light boats, plundered
the towns, pillaged the convents, and went off with their booty.
They beleaguered Paris itself, and the Carlovingian Kings were
reduced to the base necessity of purchasing a peace. In the same
way they devastated the towns lying on the Elbe; and from the
Rhine plundered Aix-la-Chapelle and Cologne, and made
Lorraine tributary to them. The Diet of Worms, in 882, did
indeed issue a general proclamation, summoning all subjects to
rise in arms, but they were compelled to put up with a
disgraceful composition. These storms came from the north and
the west. The Eastern side of the empire suffered from the
inroads of the Magyars. These barbarian peoples traversed the
country in wagons, and laid waste the whole of Southern
Germany. Through Bavaria, Swabia, and Switzerland they
penetrated into the interior of France and reached Italy. The
Saracens pressed forward from the South. Sicily had been long
in their hands: they thence obtained a firm footing in Italy,
menaced Rome — which diverted their attack by a composition
— and were the terror of Piedmont and Provence.
Thus these three peoples invaded the empire from all sides in
great masses, and in their desolating marches almost came into
contact with each other. France was devastated by the Normans
as far as the Jura; the Hungarians reached Switzerland, and the
Saracens Valaise. Calling to mind that organization of the
“arrière-ban,” and considering it in juxtaposition with this
miserable state of things, we cannot fail to be struck with the
inefficiency of all those far- famed institutions, which at such a
juncture ought to have shown themselves most effective. We
might be inclined to regard the picture of the noble and rational
constitution of the Frank monarchy under Charlemagne —
exhibiting itself as strong, comprehensive, and well ordered,
internally and externally — as a baseless figment. Yet it actually
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 386
existed; the entire political system being held together only by
the power, the greatness, the regal soul of this one man — not
based on the spirit of the people — not having become a vital
element in it. It was superficially induced — an a priori
constitution like that which Napoleon gave to Spain, and which
disappeared with the physical power that sustained it. That, on
the contrary, which renders a constitution real, is that it exists as
Objective Freedom — the Substantial form of volition — as duty
and obligation acknowledged by the subjects themselves. But
obligation was not yet recognized by the German Spirit, which
hitherto showed itself only as “Heart” and subjective choice; for
conversely, the weaker and poorer surrendered their possessions
to the strong, for the sake of gaining efficient protection. They
committed their estates to a Lord, a Convent, an Abbot, a Bishop
(feudum oblatum), and received them back, encumbered with
feudal obligations to these superiors. Instead of freemen they
became vassals — feudal dependants — and their possession a
beneficium. This is the constitution of the Feudal System.
“Feudum” is connected with “fides”; the fidelity implied in this
case is a bond established on unjust principles, a relation that
does indeed contemplate a legitimate object, but whose import
is not a whit the less injustice ; for the fidelity of vassals is not an
obligation to the Commonwealth, but a private one — ipso facto
therefore subject to the sway of chance, caprice, and violence.
Universal injustice, universal lawlessness is reduced to a system
of dependence on and obligation to individuals, so that the mere
formal side of the matter, the mere fact of compact constitutes its
sole connection with the principle of Right. — Since every man
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 388
had to protect himself, the martial spirit, which in point of
external defence seemed to have most ignominiously vanished,
was reawakened; for torpidity was roused to action partly by
extreme ill-usage, partly by the greed and ambition of
