especially remarkable to observe there, learned Jews such as
Philo, connecting abstract forms of the concrete, which they
derived from Plato and Aristotle, with their conception of the
Infinite, and recognizing God according to the more concrete
idea of Spirit, under the definition of the $. So, also, did the
profound thinkers of Alexandria comprehend the unity of the
Platonic and Aristotelian Philosophy; and their speculative
thinking attained those abstract ideas which are likewise the
fundamental purport of the Christian religion. The application,
by way of postulate, to the pagan religion, of ideas recognized as
true, was a direction which philosophy had already taken among
the heathen. Plato had altogether repudiated the current
mythology, and, with his followers, was accused of Atheism.
The Alexandrians, on the contrary, endeavored to demonstrate a
speculative truth in the Greek conceptions of the gods: and the
Emperor Julian the Apostate resumed the attempt, asserting that
the pagan ceremonials had a strict connection with rationality.
The heathen felt, as it were, obliged to give to their divinities the
semblance of something higher than sensuous conceptions; they
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 348
therefore attempted to spiritualize them. Thus much is also
certain, that the Greek religion contains a degree of Reason; for
the substance of Spirit is Reason, and its product must be
something Rational. It makes a difference, however, whether
Reason is explicitly developed in Religion, or merely
adumbrated by it, as constituting its hidden basis. And while the
Greeks thus spiritualized their sensuous divinities, the Christians
also, on their side, sought for a profounder sense in the historical
part of their religion. Just as Philo found a deeper import
shadowed forth in the Mosaic record, and idealized what he
considered the bare shell of the narrative, so also did the
Christians treat their records — partly with a polemic view, but
still more largely from a free and spontaneous interest in the
process. But the instrumentality of philosophy in introducing
these dogmas into the Christian Religion, is no sufficient ground
for asserting that they were foreign to Christianity and had
nothing to do with it. It is a matter of perfect indifference where
a thing originated; the only question is: “Is it true in and for
itself?” Many think that by pronouncing the doctrine to be Neo-
Platonic, they have ipso facto banished it from Christianity.
Whether a Christian doctrine stands exactly thus or thus in the
Bible — the point to which the exegetical scholars of modern
times devote all their attention — is not the only question. The
Letter kills, the Spirit makes alive: this they say themselves, yet
pervert the sentiment by taking the Understanding for the Spirit.
It was the Church that recognized and established the doctrines
in question — i.e. the Spirit of the Church; and it is itself an
Article of Doctrine: “I believe in a Holy Church;”24 as Christ
himself also said: “The Spirit will guide you into all truth.” In the
Nicene Council (A.D. 325), was ultimately established a fixed
confession of faith, to which we still adhere: this confession had
not, indeed, a speculative form, but the profoundly speculative is
most intimately inwoven with the manifestation of Christ
himself. Even in John ( % & ' "( 

 " &
# # )( 

) * ' ") we see the
commencement of a profounder comprehension. The profoundest
thought is connected with the personality of Christ — with the
historical and external; and it is the very grandeur of the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 349
Christian religion that, with all this profundity, it is easy of
comprehension by our consciousness in its outward aspect,
while, at the same time, it summons us to penetrate deeper. It is
thus adapted to every grade of culture, and yet satisfies the
highest requirements.
Having spoken of the relation of the Christian community to
the Roman world on the one side, and to the truth contained in its
doctrines on the other side, we come to the third point — in
which both doctrine and the external world are concerned — the
Church. The Christian community is the Kingdom of Christ —
its influencing present Spirit being Christ: for this kingdom has
an actual existence, not a merely future one. This spiritual
actuality has, therefore, also a phenomenal existence; and that,
not only as contrasted with heathenism, but with secular
existence generally. For the Church, as presenting this outward
existence, is not merely a religion as opposed to another religion,
but is at the same time a particular form of secular existence,
occupying a place side by side with other secular existence. The
religious existence of the Church is governed by Christ; the
secular side of its government is left to the free choice of the
members themselves. Into this kingdom of God an organization
must be introduced. In the first instance, all the members know
themselves filled with the Spirit; the whole community perceives
the truth and gives expression to it; yet, together with this
common participation of spiritual influence, arises the necessity
of a presidency of guidance and teaching — a body distinct from
the community at large. Those are chosen as presidents who are
distinguished for talents, character, fervor of piety, a holy life,
learning, and culture generally. The presidents — those who
have a superior acquaintance with that substantial Life of which
all are partakers, and who are instructors in that Life — those
who establish what is truth, and those who dispense its
enjoyment — are distinguished from the community at large, as
persons endowed with knowledge and governing power are from
the governed. To the intelligent presiding body, the Spirit comes
in a fully revealed and explicit form; in the mass of the
community that Spirit is only implicit. While, therefore, in the
presiding body, the Spirit exists as self-appreciating and selfG.
W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 350
cognizant, it becomes an authority in spiritual as well as in
secular matters — an authority for the truth and for the relation
of each individual to the truth, determining how he should
conduct himself so as to act in accordance with the Truth. This
distinction occasions the rise of an Ecclesiastical Kingdom in the
Kingdom of God. Such a distinction is inevitable ; but the
existence of an authoritative government for the Spiritual, when
closely examined, shows that human subjectivity in its proper
form has not yet developed itself. In the heart, indeed, the evil
will is surrendered, but the will, as human, is not yet
interpenetrated by the Deity; the human will is emancipated only
abstractly — not in its concrete reality — for the whole sequel of
History is occupied with the realization of this concrete Freedom.
Up to this point, finite Freedom has been only annulled, to make
way for infinite Freedom. The latter has not yet penetrated
secular existence with its rays. Subjective Freedom has not yet
attained validity as such: Insight [speculative conviction] does
not yet rest on a basis of its own, but is content to inhere in the
spirit of an extrinsic authority. That Spiritual [geistig] kingdom
has, therefore, assumed the shape of an Ecclesiastical [geistlich]
one, as the relation of the substantial being and essence of Spirit
to human Freedom. Besides the interior organization already
mentioned, we find the Christian community assuming also a
definite external position, and becoming the possessor of
property of its own. As property belonging to the spiritual world,
it is presumed to enjoy special protection; and the immediate
inference from this is, that the Church has no dues to pay to the
state, and that ecclesiastical persons are not amenable to the
jurisdiction of the secular courts. This entails the government by
the Church itself of ecclesiastical property and ecclesiastical
persons. Thus there originates with the Church the contrasted
spectacle of a body consisting only of private persons and the
power of the Emperor on the secular side; — on the other side,
the perfect democracy of the spiritual community, choosing its
own president. Priestly consecration, however, soon changes this
democracy into aristocracy; — though the further development
of the Church does not belong to the period now under
consideration, but must be referred to the world of a later date.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 351
It was then through the Christian Religion that the Absolute
Idea of God, in its true conception, attained consciousness. Here
Man, too, finds himself comprehended in his true nature, given
in the specific conception of “the Son.” Man, finite when
regarded for himself, is yet at the same time the Image of God
and a fountain of infinity in himself. He is the object of his own
existence — has in himself an infinite value, an eternal destiny.
Consequently he has his true home in a super-sensuous world —
an infinite subjectivity, gained only by a rupture with mere
Natural existence and volition, and by his labor to break their
power within him. This is religious self- consciousness. But in
order to enter the sphere and display the active vitality of that
religious life, humanity must become capable of it. This
capability is the  for that . What therefore
remains to be considered is, those conditions of humanity which
are the necessary corollary to the consideration that Man is
Absolute Self-consciousness — his Spiritual nature being the
starting-point and presupposition. These conditions are
themselves not yet of a concrete order, but simply the first
abstract principles, which are won by the instrumentality of the
Christian Religion for the secular State. First, under Christianity
Slavery is impossible; for man is man — in the abstract essence
of his nature — is contemplated in God; each unit of mankind is
an object of the grace of God and of the Divine purpose: “God
will have all men to be saved.” Utterly excluding all speciality,
therefore, man, in and for himself — in his simple quality of man
— has infinite value; and this infinite value abolishes, ipso facto,
all particularity attaching to birth or country. The other, the
second principle, regards the subjectivity of man in its bearing on
the Fortuitous — on Chance. Humanity has this sphere of free
Spirituality in and for itself, and everything else must proceed
from it. The place appropriated to the abode and presence of the
Divine Spirit — the sphere in question — is Spiritual
Subjectivity, and is constituted the place to which all
contingency is amenable. It follows thence, that what we
observed among the Greeks as a form of Customary Morality,
cannot maintain its position in the Christian world. For that
morality is spontaneous unreflected Wont; while the Christian
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 352
principle is independent subjectivity — the soil on which grows
the True. Now an unreflected morality cannot continue to hold
its ground against the principle of Subjective Freedom. Greek
Freedom was that of Hap and “Genius”; it was still conditioned
by Slaves and Oracles; but now the principle of absolute
Freedom in God makes its appearance. Man now no longer
sustains the relation of Dependence, but of Love — in the
consciousness that he is a partaker in the Divine existence. In
regard to particular aims [such as the Greeks referred to oracular
decision], man now forms his own determinations and recognizes
himself as plenipotentiary in regard to all finite existence. All
that is special retreats into the background before that Spiritual
sphere of subjectivity, which takes a secondary position only in
presence of the Divine Spirit. The superstition of oracles and
auspices is thereby entirely abrogated: Man is recognized as the
absolute authority in crises of decision.
It is the two principles just treated of, that now attach to Spirit
in this its self-contained phase. The inner shrine of man is
designed, on the one hand, to train the citizen of the religious life
to bring himself into harmony with the Spirit of God; on the
other hand, this is the point du départ for determining secular
relations, and its condition is the theme of Christian History. The
change which piety effects must not remain concealed in the
recesses of the heart, but must become an actual, present world,
complying with the conditions prescribed by that Absolute Spirit.
Piety of heart does not, per se, involve the submission of the
subjective will, in its external relations, to that piety. On the
contrary we see all passions increasingly rampant in the sphere
of reality, because that sphere is looked down upon with
contempt, from the lofty position attained by the world of mind,
as one destitute of all claim and value. The problem to be solved
is therefore the imbuing of the sphere of [ordinary] unreflected
Spiritual existence, with the Idea of Spirit. A general observation
here suggests itself. From time immemorial it has been
customary to assume an opposition between Reason and
Religion, as also between Religion and the World; but on
investigation this turns out to be only a distinction. Reason in
general is the Positive Existence [Wesen] of Spirit, divine as well
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 353
as human. The distinction between Religion and the World is
only this — that Religion as such, is Reason in the soul and heart
— that it is a temple in which Truth and Freedom in God are
presented to the conceptive faculty: the State, on the other hand,
regulated by the selfsame Reason, is a temple of Human
Freedom concerned with the perception and volition of a reality,
whose purport may itself be called divine. Thus Freedom in the
State is preserved and established by Religion, since moral
rectitude in the State is only the carrying out of that which
constitutes the fundamental principle of Religion. The process
displayed in History is only the manifestation of Religion as
Human Reason — the production of the religious principle which
dwells in the heart of man, under the form of Secular Freedom.
Thus the discord between the inner life of the heart and the actual
world is removed. To realize this is, however, the vocation of
another people — or other peoples — viz., the German. In
ancient Rome itself, Christianity cannot find a ground on which
it may become actual, and develop an empire.
Chapter III. The Byzantine Empire.
With Constantine the Great the Christian religion ascended the
throne of the empire. He was followed by a succession of
Christian Emperors, interrupted only by Julian — who however,
could do but little for the prostrate ancient faith. The Roman
Empire embraced the whole civilized earth, from the Western
Ocean to the Tigris — from the interior of Africa, to the Danube
(Pannonia, Dacia). Christianity soon spread through the length
and breadth of this enormous realm. Rome had long ceased to be
the exclusive residence of the Emperors. Many of Constantine’s
predecessors had resided in Milan or other places; and he himself
established a second court in the ancient Byzantium, which
received the name of Constantinople. From the first its
population consisted chiefly of Christians, and Constantine
lavished every appliance to render this new abode equal in
splendor to the old. The empire still remained in its integrity till
Theodosius the Great made permanent a separation that had been
only occasional, and divided it between his two sons. The reign
of Theodosius displayed the last faint glimmer of that splendor
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 354
which had glorified the Roman world. Under him the pagan
temples were shut, the sacrifices and ceremonies abolished, and
paganism itself forbidden: gradually however it entirely vanished
of itself. The heathen orators of the time cannot sufficiently
express their wonder and astonishment at the monstrous contrast
between the days of their forefathers and their own. “Our
Temples have become Tombs. The places which were formerly
adorned with the holy statues of the Gods are now covered with
sacred bones (relics of the Martyrs); men who have suffered a
shameful death for their crimes, whose bodies are covered with
stripes, and whose heads have been embalmed, are the object of
veneration.” All that was contemned is exalted; all that was
formerly revered, is trodden in the dust. The last of the pagans
express this enormous contrast with profound lamentation.
The Roman Empire was divided between the two sons of
Theodosius. The elder, Arcadius, received the Eastern Empire:
— Ancient Greece, with Thrace, Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt; the
younger, Honorius, the Western: — Italy, Africa, Spain, Gaul,
Britain. Immediately after the death of Theodosius, confusion
entered, and the Roman provinces were overwhelmed by alien
peoples. Already, under the Emperor Valens, the Visigoths,
pressed by the Huns, had solicited a domicile on the hither side
of the Danube. This was granted them, on the condition that they
should defend the border provinces of the empire. But
maltreatment roused them to revolt. Valens was beaten and fell
on the field. The later emperors paid court to the leader of these
Goths. Alaric, the bold Gothic Chief, turned his arms against
Italy. Stilicho, the general and minister of Honorius, stayed his
course, A.D. 403, by the battle of Pollentia, as at a later date he
also routed Radagaisus, leader of the Alans, Suevi, and others.
Alaric now attacked Gaul and Spain, and on the fall of Stilicho
returned to Italy. Rome was stormed and plundered by him A.D.
410. Afterwards Attila advanced on it with the terrible might of
the Huns — one of those purely Oriental phenomena, which, like
a mere storm-torrent, rise to a furious height and bear down
everything in their course, but in a brief space are so completely
spent, that nothing is seen of them but the traces they have left in
the ruins which they have occasioned. Attila pressed into Gaul,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 355
where, A.D. 451, a vigorous resistance was offered him by Ætius,
near Chalons on the Marne. Victory remained doubtful. Attila
subsequently marched upon Italy and died in the year 453. Soon
afterwards however Rome was taken and plundered by the
Vandals under Genseric. Finally, the dignity of the Western
Emperors became a farce, and their empty title was abolished by
Odoacer, King of the Heruli.
The Eastern Empire long survived, and in the West a new
Christian population was formed from the invading barbarian
hordes. Christianity had at first kept aloof from the state, and the
development which it experienced related to doctrine, internal
organization, discipline, etc. But now it had become dominant:
it was now a political power, a political motive. We now see
Christianity under two forms: on the one side barbarian nations
whose culture was yet to begin, who have to acquire the very
rudiments of science, law, and polity; on other side civilized
peoples in possession of Greek science and a highly refined
Oriental culture. Municipal legislation among them was
complete — having reached the highest perfection through the
labors of the great Roman jurisconsults; so that the corpus juris
compiled at the instance of the Emperor Justinian, still excites
the admiration of the world. Here the Christian religion is placed
in the midst of a developed civilization, which did not proceed
from it. There, on the contrary, the process of culture has its very
first step still to take, and that within the sphere of Christianity.
These two empires, therefore, present a most remarkable
contrast, in which we have before our eyes a grand example of
the necessity of a people’s having its culture developed in the
spirit of the Christian religion. The history of the highly civilized
Eastern Empire — where as we might suppose, the Spirit of
Christianity could be taken up in its truth and purity — exhibits
to us a millennial series of uninterrupted crimes, weaknesses,
basenesses and want of principle; a most repulsive and
consequently a most uninteresting picture. It is evident here, how
Christianity may be abstract, and how as such it is powerless, on
account of its very purity and intrinsic spirituality. It may even
be entirely separated from the World, as e.g. in Monasticism —
which originated in Egypt. It is a common notion and saying, in
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 356
reference to the power of Religion, abstractly considered, over
the hearts of men, that if Christian love were universal, private
and political life would both be perfect, and the state of mankind
would be thoroughly righteous and moral. Such representations
may be a pious wish, but do not possess truth; for religion is
something internal, having to do with conscience alone. To it all
the passions and desires are opposed, and in order that heart,
will, intelligence may become true, they must be thoroughly
educated; Right must become Custom — Habit; practical
activity must be elevated to rational action; the State must have
a rational organ-ization, and then at length does the will of
individuals become a truly righteous one. Light shining in
darkness may perhaps give color, but not a picture animated by
Spirit. The Byzantine Empire is a grand example of how the
Christian religion may maintain an abstract character among a
cultivated people, if the whole organization of the State and of
the Laws is not reconstructed in harmony with its principle. At
Byzantium Christianity had fallen into the hands of the dregs of
the population — the lawless mob. Popular license on the one
side and courtly baseness on the other side, take refuge under the
sanction of religion, and degrade the latter to a disgusting object.
In regard to religion, two interests obtained prominence: first, the
settlement of doctrine; and secondly, the appointment to
ecclesiastical offices. The settlement of doctrine pertained to the
Councils and Church authorities; but the principle of Christianity
is Freedom — subjective insight. These matters therefore, were
special subjects of contention for the populace; violent civil wars
arose, and everywhere might be witnessed scenes of murder,
conflagration and pillage, perpetrated in the cause of Christian
dogmas. A famous schism e.g. occurred in reference to the
dogma of the +!. The words read: “Holy, Holy, Holy, is
the Lord God of Zebaoth.” To this, one party, in honor of Christ,
added — “who was crucified for us.” Another party rejected the
addition, and sanguinary struggles ensued. In the contest on the
question whether Christ were ' or ' — that is
of the same or of similar nature with God — the one letter  cost
many thousands their lives. Especially notorious are the
contentions about Images, in which it often happened, that the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 357
Emperor declared for the images and the Patriarch against, or
conversely. Streams of blood flowed as the result. Gregory
Nazianzen says somewhere: “This city (Constantinople) is full
of handicraftsmen and slaves, who are all profound theologians,
and preach in their workshops and in the streets. If you want a
man to change a piece of silver, he instructs you in what consists
the distinction between the Father and the Son: if you ask the
price of a loaf of bread, you receive for answer — that the Son
is inferior to the Father; and if you ask, whether the bread is
ready, the rejoinder is that the genesis of the Son was from
Nothing.” The Idea of Spirit contained in this doctrine was thus
treated in an utterly unspiritual manner. The appointment to the
Patriarchate at Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria, and the
jealousy and ambition of the Patriarchs likewise occasioned
many intestine struggles. To all these religious contentions was
added the interest in the gladiators and their combats, and in the
parties of the blue and green color, which likewise occasioned
the bloodiest encounters; a sign of the most fearful degradation,
as proving that all feeling for what is serious and elevated is lost,
and that the delirium of religious passion is quite consistent with
an appetite for gross and barbarous spectacles.
The chief points in the Christian religion were at last, by
degrees, established by the Councils. The Christians of the
Byzantine Empire remained sunk in the dream of superstition —
persisting in blind obedience to the Patriarchs and the priesthood.
Image-Worship, to which we alluded above, occasioned the most
violent struggles and storms. The brave Emperor Leo the
Isaurian in particular, persecuted images with the greatest
obstinacy, and in the year 754, Image-Worship was declared by
a Council to be an invention of the devil. Nevertheless, in the
year 787 the Empress Irene had it restored under the authority of
a Nicene Council, and the Empress Theodora definitively
established it — proceeding against its enemies with energetic
rigor. The iconoclastic Patriarch received two hundred blows, the
bishops trembled, the monks exulted, and the memory of this
orthodox proceeding was celebrated by an annual ecclesiastical
festival. The West, on the contrary, repudiated Image-Worship
as late as the year 794, in the Council held at Frankfort; and,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 358
though retaining the images, blamed most severely the
superstition of the Greeks. Not till the later Middle Ages did
Image-Worship meet with universal adoption as the result of
quiet and slow advances.
The Byzantine Empire was thus distracted by passions of all
kinds within, and pressed by the barbarians — to whom the
Emperors could offer but feeble resistance — without. The realm
was in a condition of perpetual insecurity. Its general aspect
presents a disgusting picture of imbecility; wretched, nay, insane
passions, stifle the growth of all that is noble in thoughts, deeds,
and persons. Rebellion on the part of generals, depositions of the
Emperors by their means or through the intrigues of the courtiers,
assassination or poisoning of the Emperors by their own wives
and sons, women surrendering themselves to lusts and
abominations of all kinds — such are the scenes which History
here brings before us; till at last — about the middle of the
fifteenth century (A.D. 1453) — the rotten edifice of the Eastern
Empire crumbled in pieces before the might of the vigorous
Turks.
Part IV: The German World.
The German Spirit is the Spirit of the new World. Its aim is the
realization of absolute Truth as the unilimited self-determination
of Freedom — that Freedom which has its own absolute form
itself as its purport.25 The destiny of the German peoples is, to be
the bearers of the Christian principle. The principle of Spiritual
Freedom — of Reconciliation [of the Objective and Subjective],
was introduced into the still simple, unformed minds of those
peoples; and the part assigned them in the service of the World-
Spirit was that of not merely possessing the Idea of Freedom as
the substratum of their religious conceptions, but of producing it
in free and spontaneous developments from their subjective selfconsciousness.
In entering on the task of dividing the German World into its
natural periods, we must remark that we have not, as was the
case in treating of the Greeks and Romans, a double external
relation — backwards to an earlier World-Historical people, and
forwards to a later one — to guide us. History shows that the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 359
process of development among the peoples now under
consideration, was an altogether different one. The Greeks and
Romans had reached maturity within, ere they directed their
energies outwards. The Germans, on the contrary, began with
self- diffusion — deluging the world, and overpowering in their
course the inwardly rotten, hollow political fabrics of the
civilized nations. Only then did their development begin, kindled
by a foreign culture, a foreign religion, polity and legislation.
The process of culture they underwent consisted in taking up
foreign elements and reductively amalgamating them with their
own national life. Thus their history presents an introversion —
the attraction of alien forms of life and the bringing these to bear
upon their own. In the Crusades, indeed, and in the discovery of
America, the Western World directed its energies outwards. But
it was not thus brought in contact with a World-Historical people
that had preceded it; it did not dispossess a principle that had
previously governed the world. The relation to an extraneous
principle here only accompanies [does not constitute] the history
— does not bring with it essential changes in the nature of those
conditions which characterize the peoples in question, but rather
wears the aspect of internal evolution.26 — The relation to other
countries and periods is thus entirely different from that
sustained by the Greeks and Romans. For the Christian world is
the world of completion; the grand principle of being is realized,
consequently the end of days is fully come. The Idea can
discover in Christianity no point in the aspirations of Spirit that
is not satisfied. For its individual members, the Church is, it is
true, a preparation for an eternal state as something future; since
the units who compose it, in their isolated and several capacity,
occupy a position of particularity: but the Church has also the
Spirit of God actually present in it, it forgives the sinner and is
a present kingdom of heaven. Thus the Christian World has no
absolute existence outside its sphere, but only a relative one
which is already implicitly vanquished, and in respect to which
its only concern is to make it apparent that this conquest has
taken place. Hence it follows that an external reference ceases to
be the characteristic element determining the epochs of the
modern world. We have therefore to look for another principle
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 360
of division.
The German World took up the Roman culture and religion in
their completed form. There was indeed a German and Northern
religion, but it had by no means taken deep root in the soul;
Tacitus therefore calls the Germans: “Securi adversus Deos.”
The Christian Religion which they adopted, had received from
Councils and Fathers of the Church, who possessed the whole
culture, and in particular, the philosophy of the Greek and
Roman World, a perfected dogmatic system; the Church, too,
had a completely developed hierarchy. To the native tongue of
the Germans, the Church likewise opposed one perfectly
developed — the Latin. In art and philosophy a similar alien
influence predominated. What of Alexandrian and of formal
Aristotelian philosophy was still preserved in the writings of
Boethius and elsewhere, became the fixed basis of speculative
thought in the West for many centuries. The same principle holds
in regard to the form of the secular sovereignty. Gothic and other
chiefs gave themselves the name of Roman Patricians, and at a
later date the Roman Empire was restored. Thus the German
world appears, superficially, to be only a continuation of the
Roman. But there lived in it an entirely new Spirit, through
which the World was to be regenerated — the free Spirit, viz.
which reposes on itself — the absolutely self-determination
[Eigensinn] of subjectivity. To this self- involved subjectivity,
the corresponding objectivity [Inhalt] stands opposed as
absolutely alien. The distinction and antithesis which is evolved
from these principles, is that of Church and State. On the one
side, the Church develops itself, as the embodiment of absolute
Truth; for it is the consciousness of this truth, and at the same
time the agency for rendering the Individual harmonious with it.
On the other side stands secular consciousness, which, with its
aims, occupies the world of Limitation — the State, based on
Heart [emotional and thence social affections] or mutual
confidence and subjectivity generally. European history is the
exhibition of the growth of each of these principles severally, in
Church and State; then of an antithesis on the part of both — not
only of the one to the other, but appearing within the sphere of
each of these bodies themselves (since each of them is itself a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 361
totality); lastly, of the harmonizing of the antithesis.
The three periods of this world will have to be treated
accordingly.
The first begins with the appearance of the German Nations in
the Roman Empire — the incipient development of these
peoples, converts to Christianity, and now established in the
possession of the West. Their barbarous and simple character
prevents this initial period from possessing any great interest.
The Christian world then presents itself as “Christendom” — one
mass, in which the Spiritual and the Secular form only different
aspects. This epoch extends to Charlemagne.
The second period develops the two sides of the antithesis to
a logically consequential independence and opposition — the
Church for itself as a Theocracy, and the State for itself as a
Feudal Monarchy. Charlemagne had formed an alliance with the
Holy See against the Lombards and the factions of the nobles in
Rome. A union thus arose between the spiritual and the secular
power, and a kingdom of heaven on earth promised to follow in
the wake of this conciliation. But just at this time, instead of a
spiritual kingdom of heaven, the inwardness of the Christian
principle wears the appearance of being altogether directed
outwards and leaving its proper sphere. Christian Freedom is
perverted to its very opposite, both in a religious and secular
respect; on the one hand to the severest bondage, on the other
hand to the most immoral excess — a barbarous intensity of
every passion. In this period two aspects of society are to be
especially noticed: the first is the formation of states — superior
and inferior suzerainties exhibiting a regulated subordination, so
that every relation becomes a firmly-fixed private right,
excluding a sense of universality. This regulated subordination
appears in the Feudal System. The second aspect presents the
antithesis of Church and State. This antithesis exists solely
because the Church, to whose management the Spiritual was
committed, itself sinks down into every kind of worldliness —
a worldliness which appears only the more detestable, because
all passions assume the sanction of religion.
The time of Charles V’s reign — i.e., the first half of the
sixteenth century — forms the end of the second, and likewise
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 362
the beginning of the third period. Secularity appears now as
gaining a consciousness of its intrinsic worth — becomes aware
of its having a value of its own in the morality, rectitude, probity
and activity of man. The consciousness of independent validity
is aroused through the restoration of Christian freedom. The
Christian principle has now passed through the terrible discipline
of culture, and it first attains truth and reality through the
Reformation, This third period of the German World extends
from the Reformation to our own times. The principle of Free
Spirit is here made the banner of the World, and from this
principle are evolved the universal axioms of Reason. Formal
Thought — the Understanding — had been already developed;
but Thought received its true material first with the Reformation,
through the reviviscent concrete consciousness of Free Spirit.
From that epoch Thought began to gain a culture properly its
own: principles were derived from it which were to be the norm
for the constitution of the State. Political life was now to be
consciously regulated by Reason. Customary morality,
traditional usage lost its validity; the various claims insisted
upon, must prove their legitimacy as based on rational principles.
Not till this era is the Freedom of Spirit realized.
We may distinguish these periods as Kingdoms of the Father,
the Son, and the Spirit.27 The Kingdom of the Father is the
consolidated, undistinguished mass, presenting a self-repeating
cycle, mere change — like that sovereignty of Chronos engulfing
his offspring. The Kingdom of the Son is the manifestation of
God merely in a relation to secular existence — shining upon it
as upon an alien object. The Kingdom of the Spirit is the
harmonizing of the antithesis.
These epochs may be also compared with the earlier empires.
In the German aeon, as the realm of Totality, we see the distinct
repetition of the earlier epochs. Charlemagne’s time may be
compared with the Persian Empire; it is the period of substantial
unity — this unity having its foundation in the inner man, the
Heart, and both in the Spiritual and the Secular still abiding in its
simplicity.
To the Greek world and its merely ideal unity, the time
preceding Charles V answers; where real unity no longer exists,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 363
because all phases of particularity have become fixed in
privileges and peculiar rights. As in the interior of the realms
themselves, the different estates of the realm, with their several
claims, are isolated, so do the various states in their foreign
aspects occupy a merely external relation to each other. A
diplomatic policy arises, which in the interest of a European
balance of power, unites them with and against each other. It is
the time in which the world becomes clear and manifest to itself
(Discovery of America). So too does consciousness gain
clearness in the supersensuous world and respecting it.
Substantial objective religion brings itself to sensuous clearness
in the sensuous element (Christian Art in the age of Pope Leo),
and also becomes clear to itself in the element of inmost truth.
We may compare this time with that of Pericles. The introversion
of Spirit begins (Socrates — Luther), though Pericles is wanting
in this epoch. Charles V possesses enormous possibilities in
point of outward appliances, and appears absolute in his power;
but the inner spirit of Pericles, and therefore the absolute means
of establishing a free sovereignty, are not in him. This is the
epoch when Spirit becomes clear to itself in separations
occurring in the realm of reality; now the distinct elements of the
German world manifest their essential nature.
The third epoch may be compared with the Roman World. The
unity of a universal principle is here quite as decidedly present,
yet not as the unity of abstract universal sovereignty, but as the
Hegemony of self-cognizant Thought. The authority of Rational
Aim is acknowledged, and privileges and particularities melt
away before the common object of the State. Peoples will the
Right in and for itself; regard is not had exclusively to particular
conventions between nations, but principles enter into the
considerations with which diplomacy is occupied. As little can
Religion maintain itself apart from Thought, but either advances
to the comprehension of the Idea, or, compelled by thought itself,
becomes intensive belief — or lastly, from despair of finding
itself at home in thought, flees back from it in pious horror, and
becomes Superstition.
Section I: The Elements of the Christian German
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 364
World.
Chapter I. The Barbarian Migrations.
Respecting this first period, we have on the whole little to say,
for it affords us comparatively slight materials for reflection. We
will not follow the Germans back into their forests, nor
investigate the origin of their migrations. Those forests of theirs
have always passed for the abodes of free peoples, and Tacitus
sketched his celebrated picture of Germany with a certain love
and longing — contrasting it with the corruption and artificiality
of that world to which he himself belonged. But we must not on
this account regard such a state of barbarism as an exalted one,
or fall into some such error as Rousseau’s, who represents the
condition of the American savages as one in which man is in
possession of true freedom. Certainly there is an immense
amount of misfortune and sorrow of which the savage knows
nothing; but this is a merely negative advantage, while freedom
is essential positive. It is only the blessings conferred by
affirmative freedom that are regarded as such in the highest
grade of consciousness.
Our first acquaintance with the Germans finds each individual
enjoying an independent freedom; and yet there is a certain
community of feeling and interest, though not yet matured to a
political condition. Next we see them inundating the Roman
empire. It was partly the fertility of its domains, partly the
necessity of seeking other habitations, that furnished the inciting
cause. In spite of the wars in which they engage with the
Romans, individuals, and even entire clans, enter their service as
soldiers. Even so early as the battle of Pharsalia we find German
cavalry united with the Roman forces of Caesar. In military
service and intercourse with civilized peoples, they became
acquainted with their advantages — advantages tending to the
enjoyment and convenience of life, but also, and principally,
those of mental cultivation. In the later emigrations, many
nations — some entirely, others partially — remained behind in
their original abodes.
Accordingly, a distinction must be made between the German
nations who remained in their ancient habitations and those who
spread themselves over the Roman empire, and mingled with the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 365
conquered peoples. Since in their migratory expeditions the
Germans attached themselves to their leaders of their own free
choice, we find a peculiar duplicate condition of the great
Teutonic families (Eastern and Western Goths; Goths in all parts
of the world and in their original country; Scandinavians and
Normans in Norway, but also appearing as knightly adventurers
in the wide world). However different might be the fates of these
peoples, they nevertheless had one aim in common — to procure
themselves possessions, and to develop themselves in the
direction of political organization. This process of growth is
equally characteristic of all. In the West — in Spain and Portugal
— the Suevi and Vandals are the first settlers, but are subdued
and dispossessed by the Visigoths. A great Visigothic kingdom
was established, to which Spain, Portugal, and a part of Southern
France belonged. The second kingdom is that of the Franks — a
name which, from the end of the second century, was given in
common to the Istaevonian races between the Rhine and the
Weser. They established themselves between the Moselle and the
Scheldt, and under their leader, Clovis, pressed forward into
Gaul as far as the Loire. He afterwards reduced the Franks on the
Lower Rhine, and the Alemanni on the Upper Rhine; his sons
subjugated the Thuringians and Burgundians. The third kingdom
is that of the Ostrogoths in Italy, founded by Theodoric, and
highly nourishing beneath his rule. The learned Romans
Cassiodorus and Boëthius filled the highest offices of state under
Theodoric. But this Ostrogothic kingdom did not last long; it was
destroyed by the Byzantines under Belisarius and Narses. In the
second half (568) of the sixth century, the Lombards invaded
Italy and ruled for two centuries, till this kingdom also was
subjected to the Frank sceptre by Charlemagne. At a later date,
the Normans also established themselves in Lower Italy. Our
attention is next claimed by the Burgundians, who were
Reversely, the former were gradually transformed into
Principalities [Fürstenthumer], and became united with the
Principality of the Chief; thus enabling the authority of the king
and of the state to assert itself. While, therefore, the bond of
political unity was still wanting, the several seigneuries attained
their development independently.
In France the dynasty of Charlemagne, like that of Clovis,
became extinct through the weakness of the sovereigns who
represented it. Their dominion was finally limited to the petty
sovereignty of Laon; and the last of the Carlovingians, Duke
Charles of Lorraine, who laid claim to the crown after the death
of Louis V, was defeated and taken prisoner. The powerful Hugh
Capet, Duke of France, was proclaimed king. The title of King,
however, gave him no real power; his authority was based on his
territorial possessions alone. At a later date, through purchase,
marriage, and the dying out of families, the kings became
possessed of many feudal domains; and their authority was
frequently invoked as a protection against the oppressions of the
nobles. The royal authority in France became heritable at an
early date, because the fiefs were heritable; though at first the
kings took the precaution to have their sons crowned during their
lifetime. France was divided into many sovereignties: the Duchy
of Guienne, the Earldom of Flanders, the Duchy of Gascony, the
Earldom of Toulouse, the Duchy of Burgundy, the Earldom of
Vermandois; Lorraine too had belonged to France for some time.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 390
Normandy had been ceded to the Normans by the kings of
France, in order to secure a temporary repose from their
incursions. From Normandy Duke William passed over into
England and conquered it in the year 1066. Here he introduced
a fully developed feudal constitution — a network which, to a
great extent, encompasses England even at the present day. And
thus the Dukes of Normandy confronted the comparatively
feeble Kings of France with a power of no inconsiderable
pretensions. — Germany was composed of the great duchies of
Saxony, Swabia, Bavaria, Carinthia, Lorraine and Burgundy, the
Margraviate of Thuringia, etc. with several bishoprics and
archbishoprics. Each of those duchies again was divided into
several fiefs, enjoying more of less independence. The emperor
seems often to have united several duchies under his immediate
sovereignty. The Emperor Henry III was, when he ascended the
throne, lord of many large dukedoms; but he weakened his own
power by enfeoffing them to others. Germany was radically a
free nation, and had not, as France had, any dominant family as
a central authority; it continued an elective empire. Its princes
refused to surrender the privilege of choosing their sovereign for
themselves; and at every new election they introduced new
restrictive conditions, so that the imperial power was degraded
to an empty shadow. — In Italy we find the same political
condition. The German Emperors had pretensions to it: but their
authority was valid only so far as they could support it by direct
force of arms, and as the Italian cities and nobles deemed their
own advantage to be promoted by submission. Italy was, like
Germany, divided into many larger and smaller dukedoms,
earldoms, bishoprics and seigneuries. The Pope had very little
power, either in the North or in the South; which latter was long
divided between the Lombards and the Greeks, until both were
overcome by the Normans. — Spain maintained a contest with
the Saracens, either defensive or victorious, through the whole
mediaeval period, till the latter finally succumbed to the more
matured power of Christian civilization.
Thus all Right vanished before individual Might; for equality
of Rights and rational legislation, where the interests of the
political Totality, of the State, are kept in view, had no existence.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 391
The Third Reaction, noticed above, was that of the element of
Universality against the Real World as split up into particularity.
This reaction proceeded from below upwards — from that
condition of isolated possession itself; and was then promoted
chiefly by the church. A sense of the nothingness of its condition
seized on the world as it were universally. In that condition of
utter isolation, where only the unsanctioned might of individuals
had any validity [where the State was non-existent,] men could
find no repose, and Christendom was, so to speak, agitated by the
tremor of an evil conscience. In the eleventh century, the fear of
the approaching final judgment and the belief in the speedy
dissolution of the world, spread through all Europe. This dismay
of soul impelled men to the most irrational proceedings. Some
bestowed the whole of their possessions on the Church, and
passed their lives in continual penance; the majority dissipated
their worldly all in riotous debauchery. The Church alone
increased its riches by the hallucinations, through donations and
bequests. — About the same time too, terrible famines swept
away their victims: human flesh was sold in open market. During
this state of things, lawlessness, brutal lust, the most barbarous
caprice, deceit and cunning, were the prevailing moral features.
Italy, the centre of Christendom, presented the most revolting
aspect. Every virtue was alien to the times in question;
consequently virtus had lost its proper meaning: in common use
it denoted only violence and oppression, sometimes even
libidinous outrage. This corrupt state of things affected the clergy
equally with the laity. Their own advowees had made themselves
masters of the ecclesiastical estates intrusted to their keeping,
and lived on them quite at their own pleasure, restricting the
monks and clergy to a scanty pittance. Monasteries that refused
to accept advowees were compelled to do so; the neighboring
lords taking the office upon themselves or giving it to their sons.
Only bishops and abbots maintained themselves in possession,
being able to protect themselves partly by their own power,
partly by means of their retainers; since they were, for the most
part, of noble families.
The bishoprics being secular fiefs, their occupants were bound
to the performance of imperial and feudal service. The
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 392
