conceded by World- History on their side, should also claim for
themselves the minor justification in respect to manifestoes and
treaties on occasion of minor infringements of them, and
maintain it as it were after the fashion of advocates. But in
political complications of this kind, either party may take offence
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 324
at the conduct of the other, if it pleases, and deems it expedient
to be offended. — The Romans had long and severe contests to
maintain with the Samnites, the Etruscans, the Gauls, the Marsi,
the Umbrians and the Bruttii, before they could make themselves
masters of the whole of Italy. Their dominion was extended
thence in a southerly direction; they gained a secure footing in
Sicily, where the Carthaginians had long carried on war; then
they extended their power towards the west: from Sardinia and
Corsica they went to Spain. They thus soon came into frequent
contact with the Carthaginians, and were obliged to form a naval
power in opposition to them. This transition was easier in ancient
times than it would perhaps be now, when long practice and
superior knowledge are required for maritime service. The mode
of warfare at sea was not very different from that on land.
We have thus reached the end of the first epoch of Roman
History, in which the Romans by their retail military transactions
had become capitalists in a strength proper to themselves, and
with which they were to appear on the theatre of the world. The
Roman dominion was, on the whole, not yet very greatly
extended: only a few colonies had settled on the other side of the
Po, and on the south a considerable power confronted that of
Rome. It was the Second Punic War, therefore, that gave the
impulse to its terrible collision with the most powerful states of
the time; through it the Romans came into contact with
Macedonia, Asia, Syria, and subsequently also with Egypt. Italy
and Rome remained the centre of their great far-stretching
empire, but this centre was, as already remarked, not the less an
artificial, forced, and compulsory one. This grand period of the
contact of Rome with other states, and of the manifold
complications thence arising, has been depicted by the noble
Achaean, Polybius, whose fate it was to observe the fall of his
country through the disgraceful passions of the Greeks and the
baseness and inexorable persistency of the Romans.
Section II: Rome from the Second Punic War to the
Emperors
The second period, according to our division, begins with the
Second Punic War, that epoch which decided and stamped a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 325
character upon Roman dominion. In the first Punic War the
Romans had shown that they had become a match for the mighty
Carthage, which possessed a great part of the coast of Africa and
southern Spain, and had gained a firm footing in Sicily and
Sardinia. The second Punic War laid the might of Carthage
prostrate in the dust. The proper element of that state was the
sea; but it had no original territory, formed no nation, had no
national army; its hosts were composed of the troops of
subjugated and allied peoples. In spite of this, the great Hannibal
with such a host, formed from the most diverse nations, brought
Rome near to destruction. Without any support he maintained his
position in Italy for sixteen years against Roman patience and
perseverance; during which time however the Scipios conquered
Spain and entered into alliances with the princes of Africa.
Hannibal was at last compelled to hasten to the assistance of his
hard-pressed country; he lost the battle of Zatna in the year 552
A.U.C. and after six and thirty years revisited his paternal city, to
which he was now obliged to offer pacific counsels. The second
Punic War thus eventually established the undisputed power of
Rome over Carthage; it occasioned the hostile collision of the
Romans with the king of Macedonia, who was conquered five
years later. Now Antiochus, the king of Syria, is involved in the
melee. He opposed a huge power to the Romans, was beaten at
Thermopylae and Magnesia, and was compelled to surrender to
the Romans Asia Minor as far as the Taurus. After the conquest
of Macedonia both that country and Greece were declared free
by the Romans — a declaration whose meaning we have already
investigated, in treating of the preceding Historical nation. It was
not till this time that the Third Punic War commenced, for
Carthage had once more raised its head and excited the jealousy
of the Romans. After long resistance it was taken and laid in
ashes. Nor could the Achaean league now long maintain itself in
the face of Roman ambition: the Romans were eager for war,
destroyed Corinth in the same year as Carthage, and made
Greece a province. The fall of Carthage and the subjugation of
Greece were the central points from which the Romans gave its
vast extent to their sovereignty.
Rome seemed now to have attained perfect security; no
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 326
external power confronted it: she was the mistress of the
Mediterranean — that is of the media terra of all civilization. In
this period of victory, its morally great and fortunate personages,
especially the Scipios, attract our attention. They were morally
fortunate — although the greatest of the Scipios met with an end
outwardly unfortunate — because they devoted their energies to
their country during a period when it enjoyed a sound and
unimpaired condition. But after the feeling of patriotism — the
dominant instinct of Rome — had been satisfied, destruction
immediately invades the state regarded en masse; the grandeur
of individual character becomes stronger in intensity, and more
vigorous in the use of means, on account of contrasting
circumstances. We see the internal contradiction of Rome now
beginning to manifest itself in another form; and the epoch which
concludes the second period is also the second mediation of that
contradiction. We observed that contradiction previously in the
struggle of the patricians against the plebeians: now it assumes
the form of private interest, contravening patriotic sentiment; and
respect for the state no longer holds these opposites in the
necessary equipoise. Rather, we observe now side by side with
wars for conquest, plunder and glory, the fearful spectacle of
civil discords in Rome, and intestine wars. There does not
follow, as among the Greeks after the Median wars, a period of
brilliant splendor in culture, art and science, in which Spirit
enjoys inwardly and ideally that which it had previously
achieved in the world of action. If inward satisfaction was to
follow the period of that external Prosperity in war, the principle
of Roman life must be more concrete, But if there were such a
concrete life to evolve as an object of consciousness from the
depths of their souls by imagination and thought, what would it
have been! Their chief spectacles were triumphs, the treasures
gained in war, and captives from all nations, unsparingly
subjected to the yoke of abstract sovereignty. The concrete
element, which the Romans actually find within themselves, is
only this unspiritual unity, and any definite thought or feeling of
a non-abstract kind, can lie only in the idiosyncrasy of
individuals. The tension of virtue is now relaxed, because the
danger is past. At the time of the first Punic War, necessity
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 327
united the hearts of all for the saving of Rome. In the following
wars too, with Macedonia, Syria, and the Gauls in Upper Italy,
the existence of the entire state was still concerned. But after the
danger from Carthage and Macedon was over, the subsequent
wars were more and more the mere consequences of victories,
and nothing else was needed than to gather in their fruits. The
armies were used for particular expeditions, suggested by policy,
or for the advantages of individuals — for acquiring wealth,
glory, sovereignty in the abstract. The relation to other nations
was purely that of force. The national individuality of peoples
did not, as early as the time of the Romans, excite respect, as is
the case in modern times. The various peoples were not yet
recognized as legitimated; the various states had not yet
acknowledged each other as real essential existences. Equal right
to existence entails a union of states, such as exists in modern
Europe, or a condition like that of Greece, in which the states had
an equal right to existence under the protection of the Delphic
god. The Romans do not enter into such a relation to the other
nations, for their god is only the Jupiter Capitolinus; neither do
they respect the sacra of the other nations (any more than the
plebeians those of the patricians) ; but as conquerors in the strict
sense of the term, they plunder the Palladia of the nations. Rome
kept standing armies in the conquered provinces, and proconsuls
and propraetors were sent into them as viceroys. The Equites
collected the taxes and tributes, which they farmed under the
State. A net of such fiscal farmers (publicani) was thus drawn
over the whole Roman world. — Cato used to say, after every
deliberation of the senate: “Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse
delendam:” and Cato was a thorough Roman. The Roman
principle thereby exhibits itself as the cold abstraction of
sovereignty and power, as the pure egotism of the will in
opposition to others, involving no moral element of
determination, but appearing in a concrete form only in the shape
of individual interests. Increase in the number of provinces
issued in the aggrandizement of individuals within Rome itself,
and the corruption thence arising. From Asia, luxury and
debauchery were brought to Rome. Riches flowed in after the
fashion of spoils in war, and were not the fruit of industry and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 328
honest activity; in the same way as the marine had arisen, not
from the necessities of commerce, but with a warlike object. The
Roman state, drawing its resources from rapine, came to be rent
in sunder by quarrels about dividing the spoil. For the first
occasion of the breaking out of contention within it was the
legacy of Attalus, King of Pergamus, who had bequeathed his
treasures to the Roman State. Tiberius Gracchus came forward
with the proposal to divide it among the Roman citizens; he
likewise renewed the Licinian Agrarian laws, which had been
entirely set aside during the predominance of individuals in the
state. His chief object was to procure property for the free
citizens, and to people Italy with citizens instead of slaves. This
noble Roman, however, was vanquished by the grasping nobles,
for the Roman constitution was no longer in a condition to be
saved by the constitution itself. Caius Gracchus, the brother of
Tiberius, prosecuted the same noble aim as his brother, and
shared the same fate. Ruin now broke in unchecked, and as there
existed no generally recognized and absolutely essential object
to which the country’s energy could be devoted, individualities
and physical force were in the ascendant. The enormous
corruption of Rome displays itself in the war with Jugurtha, who
had gained the senate by bribery, and so indulged himself in the
most atrocious deeds of violence and crime. Rome was pervaded
by the excitement of the struggle against the Cimbri and
Teutones, who assumed a menacing position towards the State.
With great exertions the latter were utterly routed in Provence,
near Aix; the others in Lombardy at the Adige by Marius the
conqueror of Jugurtha. Then the Italian allies, whose demand of
Roman citizenship had been refused, raised a revolt; and while
the Romans had to sustain a struggle against a vast power in
Italy, they received the news that, at the command of
Mithridates, 80,000 Romans had been put to death in Asia
Minor. Mithridates was King of Pontus, governed Colchis and
the lands of the Black Sea, as far as the Tauric peninsula, and
could summon to his standard in his war with Rome the
populations of the Caucasus, of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and a
part of Syria, through his son-in-law Tigranes. Sulla, who had
already led the Roman hosts in the Social War, conquered him.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 329
Athens, which had hitherto been spared, was beleaguered and
taken, but “for the sake of their fathers” — as Sulla expressed
himself — not destroyed. He then returned to Rome, reduced the
popular faction, headed by Marius and Cinna, became master of
the city, and commenced systematic massacres of Roman
citizens of consideration. Forty senators and six hundred knights
were sacrificed to his ambition and lust of power.
Mithridates was indeed defeated, but not overcome, and was
able to begin the war anew. At the same time, Sertorius, a
banished Roman, arose in revolt in Spain, carried on a contest
there for eight years, and perished only through treachery. The
war against Mithridates was terminated by Pompey; the King of
Pontus killed himself when his resources were exhausted. The
Servile War in Italy is a contemporaneous event. A great number
of gladiators and mountaineers had formed a union under
Spartacus, but were vanquished by Crassus. To this confusion
was added the universal prevalence of piracy, which Pompey
rapidly reduced by a large armament.
We thus see the most terrible and dangerous powers arising
against Rome; yet the military force of this state is victorious
over all. Great individuals now appear on the stage as during the
times of the fall of Greece. The biographies of Plutarch are here
also of the deepest interest. It was from the disruption of the
state, which had no longer any consistency or firmness in itself,
that these colossal individualities arose, instinctively impelled to
restore that political unity which was no longer to be found in
men’s dispositions. It was their misfortune that they could not
maintain a pure morality, for their course of action contravened
things as they are, and was a series of transgressions. Even the
noblest — the Gracchi — were not merely the victims of
injustice and violence from without, but were themselves
involved in the corruption and wrong that universally prevailed.
But that which these individuals purpose and accomplish has on
its side the higher sanction of the World-Spirit, and must
eventually triumph. The idea of an organization for the vast
empire being altogether absent, the senate could not assert the
authority of government. The sovereignty was made dependent
on the people — that people which was now a mere mob, and
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 330
was obliged to be supported by corn from the Roman provinces.
We should refer to Cicero to see how all affairs of state were
decided in riotous fashion, and with arms in hand, by the wealth
and power of the grandees on the one side, and by a troop of
rabble on the other. The Roman citizens attached themselves to
individuals who flattered them, and who then became prominent
in factions, in order to make themselves masters of Rome. Thus
we see in Pompey and Caesar the two foci of Rome’s splendor
coming into hostile opposition: on the one side, Pompey with the
Senate, and therefore apparently the defender of the Republic —
on the other, Caesar with his legions and a superiority of genius.
This contest between the two most powerful individualities could
not be decided at Rome in the Forum. Caesar made himself
master in succession, of Italy, Spain, and Greece, utterly routed
his enemy at Pharsalia, forty-eight years before Christ, made
himself sure of Asia, and so returned victor to Rome.
In this way the world-wide sovereignty of Rome became the
property of a single possessor. This important change must not
be regarded as a thing of chance; it was necessary — postulated
by the circumstances. The democratic constitution could no
longer be really maintained in Rome, but only kept up in
appearance. Cicero, who had procured himself great respect
through his high oratorical talent, and whose learning acquired
him considerable influence, always attributes the corrupt state of
the republic to individuals and their passions. Plato, whom
Cicero professedly followed, had the full consciousness that the
Athenian state, as it presented itself to him, could not maintain
its existence, and therefore sketched the plan of a perfect
constitution accordant with his views. Cicero, on the contrary,
does not consider it impossible to preserve the Roman Republic,
and only desiderates some temporary assistance for it in its
adversity. The nature of the State, and of the Roman State in
particular, transcends his comprehension. Cato, too, says of
Caesar: “His virtues be execrated, for they have ruined my
country!” But it was not the mere accident of Caesar’s existence
that destroyed the Republic — it was Necessity. All the
tendencies of the Roman principle were to sovereignty and
military force: it contained in it no spiritual centre which it could
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 331
make the object, occupation, and enjoyment of its Spirit. The aim
of patriotism — that of preserving the State — ceases when the
lust of personal dominion becomes the impelling passion. The
citizens were alienated from the state, for they found in it no
objective satisfaction; and the interests of individuals did not take
the same direction as among the Greeks, who could set against
the incipient corruption of the practical world, the noblest works
of art in painting, sculpture and poetry, and especially a highly
cultivated philosophy. Their works of art were only what they
had collected from every part of Greece, and therefore not
productions of their own; their riches were not the fruit of
industry, as was the case in Athens, but the result of plunder.
Elegance — Culture — was foreign to the Romans per se; they
sought to obtain it from the Greeks, and for this purpose a vast
number of Greek slaves were brought to Rome. Delos was the
centre of this slave trade, and it is said that sometimes on a single
day, ten thousand slaves were purchased there. To the Romans,
Greek slaves were their poets, their authors, the superintendents
of their manufactories, the instructors of their children.
The Republic could not longer exist in Rome. We see,
especially from Cicero’s writings, how all public affairs were
decided by the private authority of the more eminent citizens —
by their power, their wealth; and what tumultuary proceedings
marked all political transactions. In the republic, therefore, there
was no longer any security; that could be looked for only in a
single will. Caesar, who may be adduced as a paragon of Roman
adaptation of means to ends — who formed his resolves with the
most unerring perspicuity, and executed them with the greatest
vigor and practical skill, without any superfluous excitement of
mind — Caesar, judged by the great scope of history, did the
Right; since he furnished a mediating element, and that kind of
political bond which men’s condition required. Caesar effected
two objects: he calmed the internal strife, and at the same time
originated a new one outside the limits of the empire. For the
conquest of the world had reached hitherto only to the circle of
the Alps, but Caesar opened a new scene of achievement: he
founded the theatre which was on the point of becoming the
centre of History. He then achieved universal sovereignty by a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 332
struggle which was decided not in Rome itself, but by his
conquest of the whole Roman World.
His position was indeed hostile to the republic, but, properly
speaking, only to its shadow; for all that remained of that
republic was entirely powerless. Pompey, and all those who were
on the side of the senate, exalted their dignitas auctoritas — their
individual rule — as the power of the republic; and the
mediocrity which needed protection took refuge under this title.
Caesar put an end to the empty formalism of this title, made
himself master, and held together the Roman world by force, in
opposition to isolated factions. Spite of this we see the noblest
men of Rome supposing Caesar’s rule to be a merely
adventitious thing, and the entire position of affairs to be
dependent on his individuality. So thought Cicero, so Brutus and
Cassius. They believed that if this one individual were out of the
way, the Republic would be ipso facto restored. Possessed by
this remarkable hallucination, Brutus, a man of highly noble
character, and Cassius, endowed with greater practical energy
than Cicero, assassinated the man whose virtues they
appreciated. But it became immediately manifest that only a
single will could guide the Roman State, and now the Romans
were compelled to adopt that opinion; since in all periods of the
world a political revolution is sanctioned in men’s opinions,
when it repeats itself. Thus Napoleon was twice defeated, and the
Bourbons twice expelled. By repetition that which at first
appeared merely a matter of chance and contingency becomes a
real and ratified existence.
Section III:
Chapter I. Rome Under the Emperors.
During this period the Romans come into contact with the
people destined to succeed them as a World-Historical nation;
and we have to consider that period in two essential aspects, the
secular and the spiritual. In the secular aspect two leading
phases must be specially regarded: first, the position of the
Ruler; and secondly, the conversion of mere individuals into
persons — the world of legal relations.
The first thing to be remarked respecting the imperial rule is
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 333
that the Roman government was so abstracted from interest, that
the great transition to that rule hardly changed anything in the
constitution. The popular assemblies alone were unsuited to the
new state of things, and disappeared. The emperor was princeps
senatus, Censor, Consul, Tribune: he united all their nominally
continuing offices in himself; and the military power — here the
most essentially important — was exclusively in his hands. The
constitution was an utterly unsubstantial form, from which all
vitality, consequently all might and power, had departed; and the
only means of maintaining its existence were the legions which
the Emperor constantly kept in the vicinity of Rome. Public
business was indeed brought before the senate, and the Emperor
appeared simply as one of its members; but the senate was
obliged to obey, and whoever ventured to gainsay his will was
punished with death, and his property confiscated. Those
therefore who had certain death in anticipation, killed
themselves, that if they could do nothing more, they might at
least preserve their property to their family. Tiberius was the
most odious to the Romans on account of his power of
dissimulation: he knew very well how to make good use of the
baseness of the senate, in extirpating those among them whom he
feared. The power of the Emperor rested, as we have said, on the
army, and the Pretorian bodyguard which surrounded him. But
the legions, and especially the Pretorians, soon became conscious
of their importance, and arrogated to themselves the disposal of
the imperial throne. At first they continued to show some respect
for the family of Caesar Augustus, but subsequently the legions
chose their own generals; such, viz., as had gained their good
will and favor, partly by courage and intelligence, partly also by
bribes, and indulgence in the administration of military
discipline.
The Emperors conducted themselves in the enjoyment of their
power with perfect simplicity, and did not surround themselves
with pomp and splendor in Oriental fashion. We find in them
traits of simplicity which astonish us. Thus, e.g., Augustus writes
a letter to Horace, in which he reproaches him for having failed
to address any poem to him, and asks him whether he thinks that
that would disgrace him with posterity. Sometimes the Senate
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 334
made an attempt to regain its consequence by nominating the
Emperor: but their nominees were either unable to maintain their
ground, or could do so only by bribing the Pretorians. The choice
of the senators and the constitution of the senate was moreover
left entirely to the caprice of the Emperor. The political
institutions were united in the person a the Emperor; no moral
bond any longer existed; the will of the Emperor was supreme,
and before him there was absolute equality. The freedmen who
surrounded the Emperor were often the mightiest in the empire;
for caprice recognizes no distinction. In the person of the
Emperor isolated subjectivity has gained a perfectly unlimited
realization. Spirit has renounced its proper nature, inasmuch as
Limitation of being and of volition has been constituted an
unlimited absolute existence. This arbitrary choice, moreover,
has only one limit, the limit of all that is human — death; and
even death became a theatrical display. Nero, e.g., died a death,
which may furnish an example for the noblest hero, as for the
most resigned of sufferers. Individual subjectivity thus entirely
emancipated from control, has no inward life, no prospective nor
retrospective emotions, no repentance, nor hope, nor fear — not
even thought; for all these involve fixed conditions and aims,
while here every condition is purely contingent. The springs of
action are none other than desire, lust, passion, fancy — in short,
caprice absolutely unfettered. It finds so little limitation in the
will of others, that the relation of will to will may be called that
of absolute sovereignty to absolute slavery. In the whole known
world, no will is imagined that is not subject to the will of the
Emperor. But under the sovereignty of that One, everything is in
a condition of order; for as it actually is [as the Emperor has
willed it], it is in due order, and government consists in bringing
all into harmony with the sovereign One. The concrete element
in the character of the Emperors is therefore of itself of no
interest, because the concrete is not of essential importance. Thus
there were Emperors of noble character and noble nature, and
who highly distinguished themselves by mental and moral
culture. Titus, Trajan, the Antonines, are known as such
characters, rigorously strict in self-government; yet even these
produced no change in the state. The proposition was never made
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 335
during their time, to give the Roman Empire an organization of
free social relationship: they were only a kind of happy chance,
which passes over without a trace, and leaves the condition of
things as it was. For these persons find themselves here in a
position in which they cannot be said to act, since no object
confronts them in opposition; they have only to will — well or
ill — and it is so. The praiseworthy emperors Vespasian and
Titus were succeeded by that coarsest and most loathsome tyrant,
Domitian: yet the Roman historian tells us that the Roman world
enjoyed tranquillizing repose under him. Those single points of
light, therefore, effected no change; the whole empire was
subject to the pressure of taxation and plunder; Italy was
depopulated; the most fertile lands remained untilled: and this
state of things lay as a fate on the Roman world.
The second point which we have particularly to remark, is the
position taken by individuals as persons. Individuals were
perfectly equal (slavery made only a trifling distinction), and
without any political right. As early as the termination of the
Social War, the inhabitants of the whole of Italy were put on an
equal footing with Roman citizens; and under Caracalla all
distinction between the subjects of the entire Roman empire was
abolished. Private Right developed and perfected this equality.
The right of property had been previously limited by distinctions
of various kinds, which were now abrogated. We observed the
Romans proceeding from the principle of abstract Subjectivity,
which now realizes itself as Personality in the recognition of
Private Right. Private Right, viz., is this, that the social unit as
such enjoys consideration in the state, in the reality which he
gives to himself — viz., in property. The living political body —
that Roman feeling which animated it as its soul — is now
brought back to the isolation of a lifeless Private Right. As, when
the physical body suffers dissolution, each point gains a life of
its own, but which is only the miserable life of worms; so the
political organism is here dissolved into atoms — viz., private
persons. Such a condition is Roman life at this epoch: on the one
side, Fate and the abstract universality of sovereignty; on the
other, the individual abstraction. “Person,” which involves the
recognition of the independent dignity of the social unit — not
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 336
on the ground of the display of the life which he possesses — in
his complete individuality — but as the abstract individuum.
It is the pride of the social units to enjoy absolute importance
as private persons; for the Ego is thus enabled to assert
unbounded claims; but the substantial interest thus
comprehended — the meum — is only of a superficial kind, and
the development of private right, which this high principle
introduced, involved the decay of political life. — The Emperor
domineered only, and could not be said to rule; for the equitable
and moral medium between the sovereign and the subjects was
wanting — the bond of a constitution and organization of the
state, in which a gradation of circles of social life, enjoying
independent recognition, exists in communities and provinces,
which, devoting their energies to the general interest, exert an
influence on the general government. There are indeed Curiae in
the towns, but they are either destitute of weight, or used only as
means for oppressing individuals, and for systematic plunder.
That, therefore, which was abidingly present to the minds of men
was not their country, or such a moral unity as that supplies: the
whole state of things urged them to yield themselves to fate, and
to strive for a perfect indifference to life — an indifference
which they sought either in freedom of thought or in directly
sensuous enjoyment. Thus man was either at war with existence,
or entirely given up to mere sensuous existence. He either
recognized his destiny in the task of acquiring the means of
enjoyment through the favor of the Emperor, or through
violence, testamentary frauds, and cunning; or he sought repose
in philosophy, which alone was still able to supply something
firm and independent: for the systems of that time — Stoicism,
Epicureanism, and Scepticism — although within their common
sphere opposed to each other, had the same general purport, viz.,
rendering the soul absolutely indifferent to everything which the
real world had to offer. These philosophies were therefore widely
extended among the cultivated: they produced in man a selfreliant
immobility as the result of Thought, i.e., of the activity
which produces the Universal. But the inward reconciliation by
means of philosophy was itself only an abstract one — in the
pure principle of personality; for Thought, which, as perfectly
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 337
refined, made itself its own object, and thus harmonized itself,
was entirely destitute of a real object, and the immobility of
Scepticism made aimlessness itself the object of the Will. This
philosophy knew nothing but the negativity of all that assumed
to be real, and was the counsel of despair to a world which no
longer possessed anything stable. It could not satisfy the living
Spirit, which longed after a higher reconciliation,
Chapter II. Christianity.
It has been remarked that Caesar inaugurated the Modern
World on the side of reality, while its spiritual and inward
existence was unfolded under Augustus. At the beginning of that
empire, whose principle we have recognized as finiteness and
particular subjectivity exaggerated to infinitude, the salvation of
the World had its birth in the same principle of subjectivity —
viz., as a particular person, in abstract subjectivity, but in such
a way that conversely, finiteness is only the form of his
appearance, while infinity and absolutely independent existence
constitute the essence and substantial being which it embodies.
The Roman World, as it has been described — in its desperate
condition and the pain of abandonment by God — came to an
open rupture with reality, and made prominent the general desire
for a satisfaction such as can only be attained in “the inner man,”
the Soul — thus preparing the ground for a higher Spiritual
World. Rome was the Fate that crushed down the gods and all
genial life in its hard service, while it was the power that purified
the human heart from all speciality. Its entire condition is
therefore analogous to a place of birth, and its pain is like the
travail-throes of another and higher Spirit, which manifested
itself in connection with the Christian Religion. This higher
Spirit involves the reconciliation and emancipation of Spirit;
while man obtains the consciousness of Spirit in its universality
and infinity. The Absolute Object, Truth, is Spirit; and as man
himself is Spirit, he is present [is mirrored] to himself in that
object, and thus in his Absolute Object has found Essential Being
and his own essential being.21 But in order that the objectivity of
Essential Being may be done away with, and Spirit be no longer
alien to itself — may be with itself [self- harmonized] — the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 338
Naturalness of Spirit — that in virtue of which man is a special,
empirical existence — must be removed; so that the alien
element may be destroyed, and the reconciliation of Spirit be
accomplished.
God is thus recognized as Spirit, only when known as the
Triune. This new principle is the axis on which the History of the
World turns. This is the goal and the starting point of History.
“When the fulness of the time was come, God sent his Son,” is
the statement of the Bible. This means nothing else than that selfconsciousness
had reached the phases of development
[Momente], whose resultant constitutes the Idea of Spirit, and
had come to feel the necessity of comprehending those phases
absolutely. This must now be more fully explained. We said of
the Greeks, that the law for their Spirit was: “Man, know
thyself.” The Greek Spirit was a consciousness of Spirit, but
under a limited form, having the element of Nature as an
essential ingredient. Spirit may have had the upper hand, but the
unity of the superior and the subordinate was itself still Natural.
Spirit appeared as specialized in the idiosyncrasies of the genius
of the several Greek nationalities and of their divinities, and was
represented by Art, in whose sphere the Sensuous is elevated
only to the middle ground of beautiful form and shape, but not to
pure Thought. The element of Subjectivity that was wanting to
the Greeks, we found among the Romans: but as it was merely
formal and in itself indefinite, it took its material from passion
and caprice; — even the most shameful degradations could be
here connected with a divine dread (vide the declaration of
Hispala respecting the Bacchanalia, Livy xxxix. 13). This
element of subjectivity ‘s afterwards further realized as
Personality of Individuals — a realization which is exactly
adequate to the principle, and is equally abstract and formal. As
such an Ego [such a personality], I am infinite to myself, and my
phenomenal existence consists in the property recognized as
mine, and the recognition of my personality. This inner existence
goes no further; all the applications of the principle merge in this.
Individuals are thereby posited as atoms; but they are at the same
time subject to the severe rule of the One, which as monas
monadum is a power over private persons [the connection
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 339
between the ruler and the ruled is not mediated by the claim of
Divine or of Constitutional Right, or any general principle, but
is direct and individual, the Emperor being the immediate lord of
each subject in the Empire]. That Private Right is therefore, ipso
facto, a nullity, an ignoring of the personality; and the supposed
condition of Right turns out to be an absolute destitution of it.
This contradiction is the misery of the Roman World. Each
person is, according to the principle of his personality, entitled
only to possesion, while the Person of Persons lays claim to the
possession of all these individuals, so that the right assumed by
the social unit is at once abrogated and robbed of validity. But
the misery of this contradiction is the Discipline of the World.
“Zucht” (discipline) is derived from “Ziehen” (to draw).22 This
“drawing” must be towards something; there must be some fixed
unity in the background in whose direction that drawing takes
place, and for which the subject of it is being trained, in order
that the standard of attainment may be reached. A renunciation,
a disaccustoming, is the means of leading to an absolute basis of
existence. That contradiction which afflicts the Roman World is
the very state of things which constitutes such a discipline — the
discipline of that culture which compels personality to display its
nothingness. But it is reserved for us of a later period to regard
this as a training; to those who are thus trained [traines,
dragged], it seems a blind destiny, to which they submit in the
stupor of suffering. The higher condition, in which the soul itself
feels pain and longing — in which man is not only “drawn,” but
feels that the drawing is into himself [into his own inmost nature]
— is still absent. What has been reflection on our part must arise
in the mind of the subject of this discipline in the form of a
consciousness that in himself he is miserable and null. Outward
suffering must, as already said, be merged in a sorrow of the
inner man. He must feel himself as the negation of himself; he
must see that his misery is the misery of his nature — that he is
in himself a divided and discordant being. This state of mind,
this self-chastening, this pain occasioned by our individual
nothingness — the wretchedness of our [isolated] self, and the
longing to transcend this condition of soul — must be looked for
elsewhere than in the properly Roman World. It is this which
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 340
gives to the Jewish People their World-Historical importance and
weight; for from this state of mind arose that higher phase in
which Spirit came to absolute self-consciousness — passing
from that alien form of being which is its discord and pain, and
mirroring itself in its own essence. The state of feeling in
question we find expressed most purely and beautifully in the
Psalms of David, and in the Prophets; the chief burden of whose
utterances is the thirst of the soul after God, its profound sorrow
for its transgressions, and the desire for righteousness and
holiness. Of this Spirit we have the mythical representation at the
very beginning of the Jewish canonical books, in the account of
the Fall. Man, created in the image of God, lost, it is said, his
state of absolute contentment, by eating of the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil. Sin consists here only in
Knowledge: this is the sinful element, and by it man is stated to
have trifled away his Natural happiness. This is a deep truth, that
evil lies in consciousness: for the brutes are neither evil nor
good; the merely Natural Man quite as little.23 Consciousness
occasions the separation of the Ego, in its boundless freedom as
arbitrary choice, from the pure essence of the Will — i.e., from
the Good. Knowledge, as the disannulling of the unity of mere
Nature, is the “Fall,” which is no casual conception, but the
eternal history of Spirit. For the state of innocence, the
paradisaical condition, is that of the brute. Paradise is a park,
where only brutes, not men, can remain. For the brute is one with
God only implicitly [not consciously]. Only Man’s Spirit (that is)
has a self-cognizant existence. This existence for self, this
consciousness, is at the same time separation from the Universal
and Divine Spirit. If I hold to my abstract Freedom, in
contraposition to the Good, I adopt the standpoint of Evil. The
Fall is therefore the eternal Mythus of Man — in fact, the very
transition by which he becomes man. Persistence in this
standpoint is, however, Evil, and the feeling of pain at such a
condition, and of longing to transcend it, we find in David, when
he says: “Lord, create for me a pure heart, a new steadfast
Spirit.” This feeling we observe even in the account of the Fall;
though an announcement of Reconciliation is not made there, but
rather one of continuance in misery. Yet we have in this narrative
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 341
the prediction of reconciliation in the sentence, “The serpent’s
head shall be bruised”; but still more profoundly expressed
where it is stated that when God saw that Adam had eaten of that
tree, he said, “Behold Adam is become as one of us, knowing
Good and Evil.” God confirms the words of the Serpent.
Implicitly and explicitly, then, we have the truth, that man
through Spirit — through cognition of the Universal and the
Particular — comprehends God Himself. But it is only God that
declares this — not man: the latter remains, on the contrary, in
a state of internal discord. The joy of reconciliation is still distant
from humanity; the absolute and final repose of his whole being
is not yet discovered to man. It exists, in the first instance, only
for God. As far as the present is concerned, the feeling of pain at
his condition is regarded as a final award. The satisfaction which
man enjoys at first, consists in the finite and temporal blessings
conferred on the Chosen Family and the possession of the Land
of Canaan. His repose is not found in God. Sacrifices are, it is
true, offered to Him in the Temple, and atonement made by
outward offerings and inward penitence. But that mundane
satisfaction in the Chosen Family, and its possession of Canaan,
was taken from the Jewish people in the chastisement inflicted
by the Roman Empire. The Syrian kings did indeed oppress it,
but it was left for the Romans to annul its individuality. The
Temple of Zion is destroyed; the God-serving nation is scattered
to the winds. Here every source of satisfaction is taken away, and
the nation is driven back to the standpoint of that primeval
mythus — the standpoint of that painful feeling which humanity
experiences when thrown upon itself. Opposed to the universal
Fatum of the Roman World, we have here the consciousness of
Evil and the direction of the mind Godwards. All that remains to
be done, is that this fundamental idea should be expanded to an
objective universal sense, and be taken as the concrete existence
of man — as the completion of his nature. Formerly the Land of
Canaan and themselves as the people of God had been regarded
by the Jews as that concrete and complete existence. But this
basis of satisfaction is now lost, and thence arises the sense of
misery and failure of hope in God, with whom that happy reality
had been essentially connected. Here, then, misery is not the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 342
stupid immersion in a blind Fate, but a boundless energy of
longing. Stoicism taught only that the Negative is not — that pain
must not be recognized as a veritable existence; but Jewish
feeling persists in acknowledging Reality and desires harmony
and reconciliation within its sphere; for that feeling is based on
the Oriental Unity of Nature — i.e., the unity of Reality, of
Subjectivity, with the substance of the One Essential Being.
Through the loss of mere outward reality Spirit is driven back
within itself; the side of reality is thus refined to Universality,
through the reference of it to the One. The Oriental antithesis of
Light and Darkness is transferred to Spirit, and the Darkness
becomes Sin. For the abnegation of reality there is no
compensation but Subjectivity itself — the Human Will as
intrinsically universal; and thereby alone does reconciliation
become possible. Sin is the discerning of Good and Evil as
separation; but this discerning likewise heals the ancient hurt,
and is the fountain of infinite reconciliation. The discerning in
question brings with it the destruction of that which is external
and alien in consciousness, and is consequently the return of
Subjectivity into itself. This, then, adopted into the actual selfconsciousness
of the World is the Reconciliation [atonement] of
the World. From that unrest of infinite sorrow — in which the
two sides of the antithesis stand related to each other — is
developed the unity of God with Reality (which latter had been
posited as negative i.e., with Subjectivity which had been
separated from Him. The infinite loss is counterbalanced only by
its infinity, and thereby becomes infinite gain. The recognition
of the identity of the Subject and God was introduced into the
World when the fulness of Time was come: the consciousness of
this identity is the recognition of God in his true essence. The
material of Truth is Spirit itself — inherent vital movement. The
nature of God as pure Spirit, is manifested to man in the
Christian Religion.
But what is Spirit? It is the one immutably homogeneous
infinite — pure Identity — which in its second phase separates
itself from itself and makes this second aspect Its own polar
opposite, viz. as existence for and in self as contrasted with the
Universal. But this separation is annulled by the fact that
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 343
atomistic Subjectivity, as simple relation to itself [as occupied
with self alone] is itself the Universal, the Identical with self. If
Spirit be defined as absolute reflection within itself in virtue of
its absolute duality — Love on the one hand as comprehending
the Emotional [Empfindung], Knowledge on the other hand as
Spirit [including the penetrative and active faculties, as opposed
to the receptive] — it is recognized as Triune: the “Father” and
the “Son,” and that duality which essentially characterizes it as
“Spirit.” It must further be observed, that in this truth, the
relation of man to this truth is also posited. For Spirit makes
itself its own [polar] opposite — and is the return from this
opposite into itself. Comprehended in pure ideality, that
antithetic form of Spirit is the Son of God; reduced to limited and
particular conceptions, it is the World-Nature and Finite Spirit:
Finite Spirit itself therefore is posited as a constituent element
[Moment] in the Divine Being. Man himself therefore is
comprehended in the Idea of God, and this comprehension may
be thus expressed — that the unity of Man with God is posited
in the Christian Religion. But this unity must not be superficially
conceived, as if God were only Man, and Man, without further
condition, were God. Man, on the contrary, is God only in so far
as he annuls the merely Natural and Limited in his Spirit and
elevates himself to God. That is to say, it is obligatory on him
who is a partaker of the truth, and knows that he himself is a
constituent [Moment] of the Divine Idea, to give up his merely
natural being: for the Natural is the Unspiritual. In this Idea of
God, then, is to be found also the Reconciliation that heals the
pain and inward suffering of man. For Suffering itself is
henceforth recognized as an instrument necessary for producing
the unity of man with God. This implicit unity exists in the first
place only for the thinking speculative consciousness; but it must
also exist for the sensuous, representative consciousness — it
must become an object for the World — it must appear, and that
in the sensuous form appropriate to Spirit, which is the human.
Christ has appeared — a Man who is God — God who is Man;
and thereby peace and reconciliation have accrued to the World.
Our thoughts naturally revert to the Greek anthropomorphism, of
which we affirmed that it did not go far enough. For that natural
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 344
elation of soul which characterized the Greeks did not rise to the
Subjective Freedom of the Ego itself — to the inwardness that
belongs to the Christian Religion — to the recognition of Spirit
as a definite positive being. — The appearance of the Christian
God involves further its being unique in its kind; it can occur
only once, for God is realized as Subject, and as manifested
Subjectivity is exclusively One Individual. The Lamas are ever
and anon chosen anew; because God is known in the East as
Substance, whose infinity of form is recognized merely in an
unlimited multeity of outward and particular manifestations. But
subjectivity as infinite relation to self, has its form in itself, and
as manifested, must be a unity excluding all others. — Moreover
the sensuous existence in which Spirit is embodied is only a
transitional phase. Christ dies; only as dead, is he exalted to
Heaven and sits at the right hand of God; only thus is he Spirit.
He himself says: “When I am no longer with you, the Spirit will
guide you into all truth.” Not till the Feast of Pentecost were the
Apostles filled with the Holy Ghost. To the Apostles, Christ as
living, was not that which he was to them subsequently as the
Spirit of the Church, in which he became to them for the first
time an object for their truly spiritual consciousness. On the
same principle, we do not adopt the right point of view in
thinking of Christ only as a historical bygone personality. So
regarded, the question is asked, What are we to make of his birth,
his Father and Mother, his early domestic relations, his miracles,
etc.? — i.e., What is he unspiritually regarded? Considered only
in respect of his talents, character and morality — as a Teacher
and so forth — we place him in the same category with Socrates
and others, though his morality may be ranked higher. But
excellence of character, morality, etc. — all this is not the ne
plus ultra in the requirements of Spirit — does not enable man
to gain the speculative idea of Spirit for his conceptive faculty.
If Christ is to be looked upon only as an excellent, even
impeccable individual, and nothing more, the conception of the
Speculative Idea, of Absolute Truth is ignored. But this is the
desideratum, the point from which we have to start. Make of
Christ what you will, exegetically, critically, historically —
demonstrate as you please, how the doctrines of the Church were
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 345
and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For he that doeth
the will of my Father in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister and mother.” Yes, it is even said: “Think not that I am
come to send peace on the Earth. I am not come to send peace
but the sword. For I am come to set a man against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the mother-in-law against
her daughter-in-law.” Here then is an abstraction from all that
belongs to reality, even from moral ties. We may say that
