also for that of medicine. It is on the rise and growing importance
of the Towns, that all these creations depend as their main
condition; a favorite subject of historical treatment in modern
times. And the rise of such communities was greatly desiderated.
For the Towns, like the Church, present themselves as reactions
against feudal violence — as the earliest legally and regularly
constituted power. Mention has already been made of the fact
that the possessors of power compelled others to put themselves
under their protection. Such centres of safety were castles
[Burgen], churches and monasteries, round which were collected
those who needed protection. These now became burghers
[Burger], and entered into a cliental relation to the lords of such
castles or to monastic bodies. Thus a firmly established
community was formed in many places. Many cities and fortified
places [Castelle] still existed in Italy, in the South of France, and
in Germany on the Rhine, which dated their existence from the
ancient Roman times, and which originally possessed municipal
rights, but subsequently lost them under the rule of feudal
governors [Vögte]. The citizens, like their rural neighbors, had
been reduced to vassalage.
The principle of free possession however began to develop
itself from the protective relation of feudal protection; i.e.,
freedom originated in its direct contrary. The feudal lords or
great barons enjoyed, properly speaking, no free or absolute
possession, any more than their dependents ; they had unlimited
power over the latter, but at the same time they also were vassals
of princes higher and mightier than themselves, and to whom
they were under engagements — which, it must be confessed,
they did not fulfil except under compulsion. The ancient
Germans had known of none other than free possession; but this
principle had been perverted into its complete opposite, and now
for the first time we behold the few feeble commencements of a
reviving sense of freedom. Individuals brought into closer
relation by the soil which they cultivated, formed among
themselves a kind of union, confederation, or conjuratio. They
agreed to be and to perform on their own behalf that which they
had previously been and performed in the service of their feudal
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 403
lord alone. Their first united undertaking was the erection of a
tower in which a bell was suspended: the ringing of the bell was
a signal for a general rendezvous, and the object of the union
thus appointed was the formation of a kind of militia. This is
followed by the institution of a municipal government, consisting
of magistrates, jurors, consuls, and the establishment of a
common treasury, the imposition of taxes, tolls, etc. Trenches are
dug and walls built for the common defence, and the citizens are
forbidden to erect fortresses for themselves individually. In such
a community, handicrafts, as distinguished from agriculture, find
their proper home. Artisans necessarily soon attained a superior
position to that of the tillers of the ground, for the latter were
forcibly driven to work; the former displayed activity really their
own, and a corresponding diligence and interest in the result of
their labors. Formerly artisans had been obliged to get
permission from their liege lords to sell their work, and thus earn
something for themselves: they were obliged to pay them a
certain sum for this privilege of market, besides contributing a
portion of their gains to the baronial exchequer. Those who had
houses of their own were obliged to pay a considerable quit-rent
for them; on all that was imported and exported, the nobility
imposed large tolls, and for the security afforded to travellers
they exacted safe-conduct money. When at a later date these
communities became stronger, all such feudal rights were
purchased from the nobles, or the cession of them compulsorily
extorted: by degrees the towns secured an independent
jurisdiction and likewise freed themselves from all taxes, tolls
and rents. The burden which continued the longest was the
obligation the towns were under to make provision for the
Emperor and his whole retinue during his stay within their
precincts, as also for seigneurs of inferior rank under the same
circumstances. The trading class subsequently divided itself into
guilds, to each of which were attached particular rights and
obligations. The factions to which episcopal elections and other
contingencies gave rise, very often promoted the attainment by
the towns of the rights above-mentioned. As it would not
infrequently happen that two rival bishops were elected to the
same see, each one sought to draw the citizens into his own
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 404
interest, by granting them privileges and freeing them from
burdens. Subsequently arose many feuds with the clergy, the
bishops and abbots. In some towns they maintained their position
as lords of the municipality; in others the citizens got the upper
hand, and obtained their freedom. Thus, e.g., Cologne threw off
the yoke of its bishop; Mayence on the other hand remained
subject. By degrees cities grew to be independent republics: first
and foremost in Italy, then in the Netherlands, Germany, and
France. They soon come to occupy a peculiar position with
respect to the nobility. The latter united itself with the
corporations of the towns, and constituted as e.g., in Berne, a
particular guild. It soon assumed special powers in the
corporations of the towns and attained a dominant position; but
the citizens resisted the usurpation and secured the government
to themselves. The rich citizens (populus crassus) now excluded
the nobility from power. But in the same way as the party of the
nobility was divided into factions — especially those of
Ghibellines and Guelfs, of which the former favored the
Emperor, the latter the Pope — that of the citizens also was rent
in sunder by intestine strife. The victorious faction was
accustomed to exclude its vanquished opponents from power.
The patrician nobility which supplanted the feudal aristocracy,
deprived the common people of all share in the conduct of the
state, and thus proved itself no less oppressive than the original
noblesse. The history of the cities presents us with a continual
change of constitutions, according as one party among the
citizens or the other — this faction or that, got the upper hand.
Originally a select body of citizens chose the magistrates; but as
in such elections the victorious faction always had the greatest
influence, no other means of securing impartial functionaries was
left, but the election of foreigners to the office of judge and
podésta. It also frequently happened that the cities chose foreign
princes as supreme seigneurs, and intrusted them with the
signoria. But all of these arrangements were only of short
continuance; the princes soon misused their sovereignty to
promote their own ambitious designs and to gratify their
passions, and in a few years were once more deprived of their
supremacy. — Thus the history of these cities presents on the
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 405
one hand, in individual characters marked by the most terrible or
the most admirable features, an astonishingly interesting picture;
on the other hand it repels us by assuming, as it unavoidably
does, the aspect of mere chronicles. In contemplating the restless
and ever-varying impulses that agitate the very heart of these
cities and the continual struggles of factions, we are astonished
to see on the other side industry — commerce by land and sea —
in the highest degree prosperous. It is the same principle of lively
vigor, which, nourished by the internal excitement in question,
produces this phenomenon.
We have contemplated the Church, which extended its power
over all the sovereignties of the time, and the Cities, where a
social organization on a basis of Right was first resuscitated, as
powers reacting against the authority of princes and feudal lords.
Against these two rising powers, there followed a reactionary
movement of princely authority; the Emperor now enters on a
struggle with the Pope and the cities. The Emperor is recognized
as the apex of Christian, i.e. secular power, the Pope on the other
hand as that of Ecclesiastical power, which had now however
become as decidedly a secular dominion. In theory, it was not
disputed that the Roman Emperor was the Head of Christendom
— that he possessed the dominium mundi — that since all
Christian states belonged to the Roman Empire, their princes
owed him allegiance in all reasonable and equitable
requirements. However satisfied the emperors themselves might
be of the validity of this claim, they had too much good sense to
attempt seriously to enforce if but the empty title of Roman
Emperor was a sufficient inducement to them to exert themselves
to the utmost to acquire and maintain it in Italy. The Othos
especially cherished the idea of the continuation of the old
Roman empire, and were ever and anon summoning the German
princes to join them in an expedition to Rome with a view to
coronation there; — an undertaking in which they were often
deserted by them and had to undergo the shame of a retreat.
Equal disappointment was experienced by those Italians who
hoped for deliverance at the hands of the Emperor from the
ochlocracy that domineered over the cities, or from the violence
of the feudal nobility in the country at large. The Italian princes
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 406
who had invoked the presence of the Emperor and had promised
him aid in asserting his claims, drew back and left him in the
lurch; and those who had previously expected salvation for their
country, then broke out into bitter complaints that their beautiful
country was devastated by barbarians, their superior civilization
trodden under foot, and that right and liberty, deserted by the
Emperor, must also perish. Especially touching and deep are the
lamentations and reproaches which Dante addresses to the
Emperors,
The second complication with Italy was that struggle which
contemporaneously with the former was sustained chiefly by the
great Swabians — the house of Hohenstaufen — and whose
object was to bring back the secular power of the Church, which
had become independent, to its original dependence on the state.
The Papal See was also a secular power and sovereignty, and the
Emperor asserted the superior prerogative of choosing the Pope
and investing him with his secular sovereignty. It was these
rights of the State for which the Emperors contended. But to that
secular power which they withstood, they were at the same time
subject, in virtue of its spiritual pretensions: thus the contest was
an interminable contradiction. Contradictory as the varying
phases of the contest, in which reconciliation was ever
alternating with renewed hostilities, was also the instrumentality
employed in the struggle. For the power with which the
Emperors made head against their enemy — the princes, their
servants and subjects, were divided in their own minds,
inasmuch as they were bound by the strongest ties of allegiance
to the Emperor and to his enemy at one and the same time. The
chief interest of the princes lay in that very assumption of
independence in reference to the State, against which on the part
of the Papal See the Emperor was contending ; so that they were
willing to stand by the Emperor in cases where the empty dignity
of the imperial crown was impugned, or on some particular
occasions — e.g., in a contest with the cities — but abandoned
him when he aimed at seriously asserting his authority against
the secular power of the clergy, or against other princes.
As, on the one hand, the German emperors sought to realize
their title in Italy, so, on the other hand, Italy had its political
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 407
centre in Germany. The interests of the two countries were thus
linked together, and neither could gain political consolidation
within itself. In the brilliant period of the Hohenstaufen dynasty,
individuals of commanding character sustained the dignity of the
throne; sovereigns like Frederick Barbarossa, in whom the
imperial power manifested itself in its greatest majesty, and who
by his personal qualities succeeded in attaching the subject
princes to his interests. Yet brilliant as the history of the
Hohenstaufen dynasty may appear, and stirring as might have
been the contest with the Church, the former presents on the
whole nothing more than the tragedy of this house itself, and the
latter had no important result in the sphere of Spirit. The cities
were indeed compelled to acknowledge the imperial authority,
and their deputies swore to observe the decisions of the
Roncalian Diet; but they kept their word no longer than they
were compelled to do so. Their sense of obligation depended
exclusively on the direct consciousness of a superior power
ready to enforce it. It is said that when the Emperor Frederick I
asked the deputies of the cities whether they had not sworn to the
conditions of peace, they answered: “Yes, but not that we would
observe them.” The result was that Frederick I at the Peace of
Constance (1183) was obliged to concede to them a virtual
independence; although he appended the stipulation, that in this
concession their feudal obligations to the German Empire were
understood to be reserved. The contest between the Emperors
and the Popes regarding investitures was settled at the close of
1122 by Henry V and Pope Calixtus II on these terms: the
Emperor was to invest with the sceptre; the Pope with the ring
and crosier; the chapter were to elect the Bishops in the presence
of the Emperor or of imperial commissioners; then the Emperor
was to invest the Bishop as a secular feudatory with the temper
alia, while the ecclesiastical investiture was reserved for the
Pope. Thus the protracted contest between the secular and
spiritual powers was at length set at rest.
Chapter II. The Crusades.
The Church gained the victory in the struggle referred to in the
previous chapter; and in this way secured as decided a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 408
supremacy in Germany, as she did in the other states of Europe
by a calmer process. She made herself mistress of all the
relations of life, and of science and art; and she was the
permanent repository of spiritual treasures. Yet notwithstanding
this full and complete development of ecclesiastical life, we find
a deficiency and consequent craving manifesting itself in
Christendom, and which drove it out of itself. To understand this
want, we must revert to the nature of the Christian religion itself,
and particularly to that aspect of it by which it has a footing in
the Present in the consciousness of its votaries.
The objective doctrines of Christianity had been already so
firmly settled by the Councils of the Church, that neither the
mediaeval nor any other philosophy could develop them further,
except in the way of exalting them intellectually, so that they
might be satisfactory as presenting the form of Thought. And one
essential point in this doctrine was the recognition of the Divine
Nature as not in any sense an other-world existence [ein
Jenseits], but as in unity with Human Nature in the Present and
Actual. But this Presence is at the same time exclusively
Spiritual Presence. Christ as a particular human personality has
left the world; his temporal existence is only a past one — i.e.,
it exists only in mental conception. And since the Divine
existence on earth is essentially of a spiritual character, it cannot
appear in the form of a Dalai-Lama. The Pope, however high his
position as Head of Christendom and Vicar of Christ, calls
himself only the Servant of Servants. How then did the Church
realize Christ as a definite and present existence? The principal
form of this realization was, as remarked above, the Holy
Supper, in the form it presented as the Mass: in this the Life,
Suffering, and Death of the actual Christ were verily present, as
an eternal and daily repeated sacrifice. Christ appears as a
definite and present existence in a sensuous form as the Host,
consecrated by the Priest; so far all is satisfactory: that is to say,
it is the Church, the Spirit of Christ, that attains in this ordinance
direct and full assurance. But the most prominent feature in this
sacrament is, that the process by which Deity is manifested, is
conditioned by the limitations of particularity — that the Host,
this Thing, is set up to be adored as God. The Church then might
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 409
have been able to content itself with this sensuous presence of
Deity; but when it is once granted that God exists in external
phenomenal presence, this external manifestation immediately
becomes infinitely varied; for the need of this presence is
infinite. Thus innumerable instances will occur in the experience
of the Church, in which Christ has appeared to one and another,
in various places; and still more frequently his divine Mother,
who as standing nearer to humanity, is a second mediator
between the Mediator and man (the miracle-working images of
the Virgin are in their way Hosts, since they supply a benign and
gracious presence of God). In all places, therefore, there will
occur manifestations of the Heavenly, in specially gracious
appearances, the stigmata of Christ’s Passion, etc.; and the
Divine will be realized in miracles as detached and isolated
phenomena. In the period in question the Church presents the
aspect of a world of miracle; to the community of devout and
pious persons natural existence has utterly lost its stability and
certainty: rather, absolute certainty has turned against it, and the
Divine is not conceived of by Christendom under conditions of
universality as the law and nature of Spirit, but reveals itself in
isolated and detached phenomena, in which the rational form of
existence is utterly perverted.
In this complete development of the Church, we may find a
deficiency: but what can be felt as a want by it? What compels
it, in this state of perfect satisfaction and enjoyment, to wish for
something else within the limits of its own principles — without
apostatizing from itself? Those miraculous images, places, and
times, are only isolated points, momentary appearances — are
not an embodiment of Deity, not of the highest and absolute
kind. The Host, the supreme manifestation, is to be found indeed
in innumerable churches; Christ is therein transubstantiated to a
present and particular existence: but this itself is of a vague and
general character; it is not his actual and very presence as
particularized in Space. That presence has passed away, as
regards time; but as spatial and as concrete in space it has a
mundane permanence in this particular spot, this particular
village, etc. It is then this mundane existence [in Palestine] which
Christendom desiderates, which it is resolved on attaining.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 410
Pilgrims in crowds had indeed been able to enjoy it; but the
approach to the hallowed localities is in the hands of the Infidels,
and it is a reproach to Christendom that the Holy Places and the
Sepulchre of Christ in particular are not in possession of the
Church. In this feeling Christendom was united; consequently the
Crusades were undertaken, whose object was not the furtherance
of any special interests on the part of the several states that
engaged in them, but simply and solely the conquest of the Holy
Land.
The West once more sallied forth in hostile array against the
East. As in the expedition of the Greeks against Troy, so here the
invading hosts were entirely composed of independent feudal
lords and knights; though they were not united under a real
individuality, as were the Greeks under Agamemnon or
Alexander. Christendom, on the contrary, was engaged in an
undertaking whose object was the securing of the definite and
present existence [of Deity] — the real culmination of
Individuality. This object impelled the West against the East, and
this is the essential interest of the Crusades.
The first and immediate commencement of the Crusades was
made in the West itself. Many thousands of Jews were
massacred, and their property seized; and after this terrible
prelude Christendom began its march. The monk, Peter the
Hermit of Amiens, led the way with an immense troop of rabble.
This host passed in the greatest disorder through Hungary, and
robbed and plundered as they went; but their numbers dwindled
away, and only a few reached Constantinople. For rational
considerations were out of the question; the mass of them
believed that God would be their immediate guide and protector.
The most striking proof that enthusiasm almost robbed the
nations of Europe of their senses, is supplied by the fact that at
a later time troops of children ran away from their parents, and
went to Marseilles, there to take ship for the Holy Land. Few
reached it; the rest were sold by the merchants to the Saracens as
slaves.
At last, with much trouble and immense loss, more regular
armies attained the desired object; they beheld themselves in
possession of all the Holy Places of note — Bethlehem,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 411
Gethsemane, Golgotha, and even the Holy Sepulchre. In the
whole expedition — in all the acts of the Christians — appeared
that enormous contrast (a feature characteristic of the age) — the
transition on the part of the Crusading host from the greatest
excesses and outrages to the profoundest contrition and
humiliation. Still dripping with the blood of the slaughtered
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Christians fell down on their faces
at the tomb of the Redeemer, and directed their fervent
supplications to him.
Thus did Christendom come into the possession of its highest
good. Jerusalem was made a kingdom, and the entire feudal
system was introduced there — a constitution which, in presence
of the Saracens, was certainly the worst that could be adopted.
Another crusade in the year 1204 resulted in the conquest of
Constantinople and the establishment of a Latin Empire there.
Christendom, therefore, had appeased its religious craving; it
could now veritably walk unobstructed in the footsteps of the
Saviour. Whole shiploads of earth were brought from the Holy
Land to Europe. Of Christ himself no corporeal relics could be
obtained, for he was arisen: the Sacred Handkerchief, the Cross,
and lastly the Sepulchre, were the most venerated memorials.
But in the Grave is found the real point of retro-version; it is in
the grave that all the vanity of the Sensuous perishes. At the
Holy Sepulchre the vanity of [the cherished] opinion passes away
[the fancies by which the substance of truth has been obscured
disappear] ; there all is seriousness. In the negation of that
definite and present embodiment — i.e., of the Sensuous — it is
that the turning-point in question is found, and those words have
an application: “Thou wouldst not suffer thy Holy One to see
corruption.” Christendom was not to find its ultimatum of truth
in the grave. At this sepulchre the Christian world received a
second time the response given to the disciples when they sought
the body of the Lord there: “Why seek ye the living among the
dead? He is not here, but is risen.” You must not look for the
principle of your religion in the Sensuous, in the grave among
the dead, but in the living Spirit in yourselves. We have seen
how the vast idea of the union of the Finite with the Infinite was
perverted to such a degree as that men looked for a definite
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 412
embodiment of the Infinite in a mere isolated outward object [the
Host]. Christendom found the empty Sepulchre, but not the union
of the Secular and the Eternal; and so it lost the Holy Land. It
was practically undeceived; and the result which it brought back
with it was of a negative kind: viz., that the definite embodiment
which it was seeking, was to be looked for in Subjective
Consciousness alone, and in no external object; that the definite
form in question, presenting the union of the Secular with the
Eternal, is the Spiritual self-cognizant independence of the
individual. Thus the world attains the conviction that man must
look within himself for that definite embodiment of being which
is of a divine nature: subjectivity thereby receives absolute
authorization, and claims to determine for itself the relation [of
all that exists] to the Divine.32 This then was the absolute result
of the Crusades, and from them we may date the commencement
of self-reliance and spontaneous activity. The West bade an
eternal farewell to the East at the Holy Sepulchre, and gained a
comprehension of its own principle of subjective infinite
Freedom. Christendom never appeared again on the scene of
history as one body.
Crusades of another kind, bearing somewhat the character of
wars with a view to mere secular conquest, but which involved
a religious interest also, were the contests waged by Spain
against the Saracens in the peninsula itself. The Christians had
been shut up in a corner by the Arabs; but they gained upon their
adversaries in strength, because the Saracens in Spain and Africa
were engaged in war in various directions, and were divided
among themselves. The Spaniards, united with Frank knights,
undertook frequent expeditions against the Saracens; and in this
collision of the Christians with the chivalry of the East — with
its freedom and perfect independence of soul — the former
became also partakers in this freedom. Spain gives us the fairest
picture of the knighthood of the Middle Ages, and its hero is the
Cid. Several Crusades, the records of which excite our unmixed
loathing and detestation, were undertaken against the South of
France also. There an aesthetic culture had developed itself: the
Troubadours had introduced a freedom of manners similar to that
which prevailed under the Hohenstaufen Emperors in Germany;
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 413
but with this difference, that the former had in it something
affected, while the latter was of a more genuine kind. But as in
Upper Italy, so also in the South of France fanatical ideas of
purity had been introduced;33 a Crusade was therefore preached
against that country by Papal authority. St. Dominic entered it
with a vast host of invaders, who, in the most barbarous manner,
pillaged and murdered the innocent and the guilty
indiscriminately, and utterly laid waste the fair region which they
inhabited.
Through the Crusades the Church reached the completion of its
authority: it had achieved the perversion of religion and of the
divine Spirit; it had distorted the principle of Christian Freedom
to a wrongful and immoral slavery of men’s souls; and in so
doing, far from abolishing lawless caprice and violence and
supplanting them by a virtuous rule of its own, it had even
enlisted them in the service of ecclesiastical authority. In the
Crusades the Pope stood at the head of the secular power: the
Emperor appeared only in a subordinate position, like the other
princes, and was obliged to commit both the initiative and the
executive to the Pope, as the manifest generalissimo of the
expedition. We have already seen the noble house of
Hohenstaufen presenting the aspect of chivalrous, dignified and
cultivated opponents of the Papal power, when Spirit [the moral
and intellectual element in Christendom] had given up the
contest. We have seen how they were ultimately obliged to yield
to the Church; which, elastic enough to sustain any attack, bore
down all opposition and would not move a step towards
conciliation. The fall of the Church was not to be effected by
open violence; it was from within — by the power of Spirit and
by an influence that wrought its way upwards — that ruin
threatened it. Respect for the Papacy could not but be weakened
by the very fact that the lofty aim of the Crusades — the
satisfaction expected from the enjoyment of the sensuous
Presence — was not attained. As little did the Popes succeed in
keeping possession of the Holy Land. Zeal for the holy cause
was exhausted among the princes of Europe. Grieved to the heart
by the defeat of the Christians, the Popes again and again urged
them to advance to the rescue; but lamentations and entreaties
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 414
were vain, and they could effect nothing. Spirit, disappointed
with regard to its craving for the highest form of the sensuous
presence of Deity, fell back upon itself. A rupture, the first of its
kind and profound as it was novel, took place. From this time
forward we witness religious and intellectual movements in
which Spirit — transcending the repulsive and irrational
existence by which it is surrounded — either finds its sphere of
exercise within itself, and draws upon its own resources for
satisfaction, or throws its energies into an actual world of general
and morally justified aims, which are therefore aims consonant
with Freedom. The efforts thus originated are now to be
described: they were the means by which Spirit was to be
prepared to comprehend the grand purpose of its Freedom in a
form of greater purity and moral elevation.
To this class of movements belongs in the first place the
establishment of monastic and chivalric orders, designed to carry
out those rules of life which the Church had distinctly enjoined
upon its members. That renunciation of property, riches,
pleasures, and free will, which the Church had designated as the
highest of spiritual attainments, was to be a reality — not a mere
profession. The existing monastic and other institutions that had
adopted this vow of renunciation, had been entirely sunk in the
corruption of worldliness. But now Spirit sought to realize in the
sphere of the principle of negativity — purely in itself — what
the Church had demanded. The more immediate occasion of this
movement was the rise of numerous heresies in the South of
France and Italy, whose tendency was in the direction of
enthusiasm; and the unbelief which was now gaining ground, but
which the Church justly deemed not so dangerous as those
heresies. To counteract these evils, new monastic orders were
founded, the chief of which was that of the Franciscans, or
Mendicant Friars, whose founder, St. Francis of Assisi — a man
possessed by an enthusiasm and ecstatic passion that passed all
bounds — spent his life in continually striving for the loftiest
purity. He gave an impulse of the same kind to his order; the
greatest fervor of devotion, the sacrifice of all pleasures in
contravention of the prevailing worldliness of the Church,
continual penances, the severest poverty (the Franciscans lived
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 415
on daily alms) — were therefore peculiarly characteristic of it.
Contemporaneously with it arose the Dominican order, founded
by St. Dominic; its special business was preaching. The
mendicant friars were diffused through Christendom to an
incredible extent; they were, on the one hand, the standing
apostolic army of the Pope, while, on the other hand, they
strongly protested against his worldliness. The Franciscans were
powerful allies of Louis of Bavaria in his resistance of the Papal
assumptions, and they are said to have been the authors of the
position, that a General Council was higher authority than the
Pope; but subsequently they too sank down into a torpid and
unintelligent condition. In the same way the ecclesiastical Orders
of Knighthood contemplated the attainment of purity of Spirit.
We have already called attention to the peculiar chivalric spirit
which had been developed in Spain through the struggle with the
Saracens: the same spirit was diffused as the result of the
Crusades through the whole of Europe. The ferocity and savage
valor that characterized the predatory life of the barbarians —
pacified and brought to a settled state by possession, and
restrained by the presence of equals — was elevated by religion
and then kindled to a noble enthusiasm through contemplating
the boundless magnanimity of Oriental prowess. For Christianity
also contains the element of boundless abstraction and freedom;
the Oriental chivalric spirit found therefore in Occidental hearts
a response, which paved the way for their attaining a nobler
virtue than they had previously known. Ecclesiastical orders of
knighthood were instituted on a basis resembling that of the
monastic fraternities. The same conventual vow of renunciation
was imposed on their members — the giving up of all that was
worldly. But at the same time they undertook the defence of the
pilgrims: their first duty therefore was knightly bravery;
ultimately, they were also pledged to the sustenance and care of
the poor and the sick. The Orders of Knighthood were divided
into three: that of St. John, that of the Temple, and the Teutonic
Order. These associations are essentially distinguished from the
self-seeking principle of feudalism. Their members sacrificed
themselves with almost suicidal bravery for a common interest.
Thus these Orders transcended the circle of their immediate
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 416
environment, and formed a network of fraternal coalition over
the whole of Europe. But their members sank down to the level
of vulgar interests, and the Orders became in the sequel a
provisional institute for the nobility generally, rather than
anything else. The Order of the Temple was even accused of
forming a religion of its own, and of having renounced Christ in
the creed which, under the influence of the Oriental Spirit, it had
adopted.
A second impulsion, having a similar origin, was that in the
direction of Science. The development of Thought — the
abstractly Universal — now had its commencement. Those
fraternal associations themselves, having a common object, in
whose service their members were enlisted, point to the fact that
a general principle was beginning to be recognized, and which
gradually became conscious of its power. Thought was first
directed to Theology, which now became Philosophy under the
name of Scholastic Divinity. For philosophy and theology have
the Divine as their common object; and although the theology of
the Church was a stereotyped dogma, the impulse now arose to
justify this body of doctrine in the view of Thought. “When we
have arrived at Faith,” says the celebrated scholastic, Anselm, “it
is a piece of negligence to stop short of convincing ourselves, by
the aid of Thought, of that to which we have given credence.”
But thus conditioned Thought was not free, for its material was
already posited ab extra; it was to the proof of this material that
philosophy devoted its energies. But Thought suggested a variety
of questions, the complete answer to which was not given
directly in the symbols of the Church; and since the Church had
not decided respecting them, they were legitimate subjects of
controversy. Philosophy was indeed called an ancilla fidei, for it
was in subjection to that material of the Church’s creed, which
had been already definitely settled; but yet it was impossible for
the opposition between Thought and Belief not to manifest itself.
As Europe presented the spectacle of chivalric contests generally
— passages of arms and tournaments — it was now the theatre
for intellectual jousting also. It is incredible to what an extent the
abstract forms of Thought were developed, and what dexterity
was acquired in the use of them. This intellectual tourneying for
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 417
the sake of exhibiting skill, and as a diversion (for it was not the
doctrines themselves, but only the forms in which they were
couched that made the subject of debate), was chiefly prosecuted
and brought to perfection in France. France, in fact, began at that
time to be regarded as the centre of Christendom : there the
scheme of the first Crusades originated, and French armies
carried it out: there the Popes took refuge in their struggles with
the German emperors and with the Norman princes of Naples
and Sicily, and there for a time they made a continuous sojourn.
— We also observe in the period subsequent to the Crusades,
commencements of Art — of Painting, viz.: even during their
continuance a peculiar kind of poetry had made it appearance.
Spirit, unable to satisfy its cravings, created for itself by
imagination fairer forms and in a calmer and freer manner than
the actual world could offer.
Chapter III. The Transition from Feudalism to Monarchy.
The moral phenomena above mentioned, tending in the
direction of a general principle, were partly of a subjective,
partly of a speculative order. But we must now give particular
attention to the practical political movements of the period. The
advance which that period witnessed, presents a negative aspect
in so far as it involves the termination of the sway of individual
caprice and of the isolation of power. Its affirmative aspect is the
rise of a supreme authority whose dominion embraces all — a
political power properly so called, whose subjects enjoy an
equality of rights, and in which the will of the individual is
subordinated to that common interest which underlies the whole.
This is the advance from Feudalism to Monarchy. The principle
of feudal sovereignty is the outward force of individuals —
princes, liege lords; it is a force destitute of intrinsic right. The
subjects of such a Constitution are vassals of a superior prince or
seigneur, to whom they have stipulated duties to perform: but
whether they perform these duties or not, depends upon the
seigneur’s being able to induce them so to do, by force of
character or by grant of favors: — conversely, the recognition of
those feudal claims themselves was extorted by violence in the
first instance; and the fulfilment of the corresponding duties
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 418
could be secured only by the constant exercise of the power
which was the sole basis of the claims in question. The
monarchical principle also implies a supreme authority, but it is
an authority over persons possessing no independent power to
support their individual caprice; where we have no longer caprice
opposed to caprice; for the supremacy implied in monarchy is
essentially a power emanating from a political body, and is
pledged to the furtherance of that equitable purpose on which the
constitution of a state is based. Feudal sovereignty is a
polyarchy: we see nothing but Lords and Serfs; in Monarchy, on
the contrary, there is one Lord and no Serf, for servitude is
abrogated by it, and in it Right and Law are recognized; it is the
source of real freedom. Thus in monarchy the caprice of
individuals is kept under, and a common gubernatorial interest
established. In the suppression of those isolated powers, as also
in the resistance made to that suppression, it seems doubtful
whether the desire for a lawful and equitable state of things, or
the wish to indulge individual caprice, is the impelling motive.
Resistance to kingly authority is entitled Liberty, and is lauded
as legitimate and noble when the idea of arbitrary will is
associated with that authority. But by the arbitrary will of an
individual exerting itself so as to subjugate a whole body of men,
a community is formed; and comparing this state of things with
that in which every point is a centre of capricious violence, we
find a much smaller number of points exposed to such violence.
The great extent of such a sovereignty necessitates general
arrangements for the purposes of organization, and those who
govern in accordance with those arrangements are at the same
time, in virtue of their office itself, obedient to the state: Vassals
become Officers of State, whose duty it is to execute the laws by
which the state is regulated. But since this monarchy is
developed from feudalism, it bears in the first instance the stamp
of the system from which it sprang. — individuals quit their
isolated capacity and become members of Estates [or Orders of
the Realm] and Corporations; the vassals are powerful only by
combination as an Order; in contraposition to them the cities
constitute Powers in virtue of their communal existence. Thus
the authority of the sovereign inevitably ceases to be mere
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 419
arbitrary sway. The consent of the Estates and Corporations is
essential to its maintenance ; and if the prince wishes to have that
consent, he must will what is just and reasonable.
We now see a Constitution embracing various Orders, while
Feudal rule knows no such Orders. We observe the transition
from feudalism to monarchy taking place in three ways:
1. Sometimes the lord paramount gains a mastery over his
independent vassals, by subjugating their individual power —
thus making himself sole ruler.
2. Sometimes the princes free themselves from the feudal
relation altogether, and become the territorial lords of certain
states; or lastly
3. The lord paramount unites the particular lordships that own
him as their superior, with his own particular suzerainty, in a
more peaceful way, and thus becomes master of the whole.
These processes do not indeed present themselves in history in
that pure and abstract form in which they are exhibited here:
often we find more modes than one appearing
contemporaneously ; but one or the other always predominates.
The cardinal consideration is that the basis and essential
condition of such a political formation is to be looked for in the
particular nationalities in which it had its birth. Europe presents
particular nations, constituting a unity in their very nature, and
having the absolute tendency to form a state. All did not succeed
in attaining this political unity: we have now to consider them
severally in relation to the change thus introduced.
First, as regards the Roman empire, the connection between
Germany and Italy naturally results from the idea of that empire
: the secular dominion united with the spiritual was to constitute
one whole; but this state of things was rather the object of
constant struggle than one actually attained. In Germany and
Italy the transition from the feudal condition to monarchy
involved the entire abrogation of the former: the vassals became
independent monarchs.
Germany had always embraced a great variety of stocks: —
Swabians, Bavarians, Franks, Thuringians, Saxons, Burgundians:
to these must be added the Sclaves of Bohemia, Germanized
Sclaves in Mecklenburg, in Brandenburg, and in a part of Saxony
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 420
and Austria; so that no such combination as took place in France
was possible. Italy presented a similar state of things. The
Lombards had established themselves there, while the Greeks
still possessed the Exarchate and Lower Italy: the Normans too
established a kingdom of their own in Lower Italy, and the
Saracens maintained their ground for a time in Sicily. When the
rule of the house of Hohenstaufen was terminated, barbarism got
the upper hand throughout Germany; the country being broken
up into several sovereignties, in which a forceful despotism
prevailed. It was the maxim of the electoral princes to raise only
weak princes to the imperial throne; they even sold the imperial
dignity to foreigners. Thus the unity of the state was virtually
annulled. A number of centres of power were formed, each of
which was a predatory state: the legal constitution recognized by
feudalism was dissolved, and gave place to undisguised violence
and plunder; and powerful princes made themselves lords of the
country. After the interregnum the Count of Hapsburg was
elected Emperor, and the House of Hapsburg continued to fill the
imperial throne with but little interruption. These emperors were
obliged to create a force of their own, as the princes would not
grant them an adequate power attached to the empire. But that
state of absolute anarchy was at last put an end to by associations
having general aims in view. In the cities themselves we see
associations of a minor order; but now confederations of cities
were formed with a common interest in the suppression of
predatory violence. Of this kind was the Hanseatic League in the
North, the Rhenish League consisting of cities lying along the
Rhine, and the Swabian League. The aim of all these
confederations was resistance to the feudal lords; and even
princes united with the cities, with a view to the subversion of
the feudal condition and the restoration of a peaceful state of
things throughout the country. What the state of society was
under feudal sovereignty is evident from the notorious
association formed for executing criminal justice: it was a private
tribunal, which, under the name of the Vehmgericht, held secret
sittings; its chief seat was the northwest of Germany. A peculiar
peasant association was also formed. In Germany the peasants
were bondmen; many of them took refuge in the towns, or settled
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 421
down as freemen in the neighborhood of the towns
(Pfahlbürger); but in Switzerland a peasant fraternity was
established. The peasants of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden were
under imperial governors; for the Swiss governments were not
the property of private possessors, but were official appointments
of the Empire. These the sovereigns of the Hapsburg line wished
to secure to their own house. The peasants, with club and ironstudded
mace [Morgenstern], returned victorious from a contest
with the haughty steel-clad nobles, armed with spear and sword,
and practised in the chivalric encounters of the tournament.
Another invention also tended to deprive the nobility of the
ascendancy which they owed to their accoutrements — that of
gunpowder. Humanity needed it, and it made its appearance
forthwith. It was one of the chief instruments in freeing the world
from the dominion of physical force, and placing the various
orders of society on a level. With the distinction between the
weapons they used, vanished also that between lords and serfs.
And before gunpowder fortified places were no longer
impregnable, so that strongholds and castles now lose their
importance. We may indeed be led to lament the decay or the
depreciation of the practical value of personal valor — the
bravest, the noblest may be shot down by a cowardly wretch at
safe distance in an obscure lurking-place; but, on the other hand,
gunpowder has made a rational, considerate bravery — Spiritual
valor — the essential to martial success. Only through this
instrumentality could that superior order of valor be called forth
— that valor in which the heat of personal feeling has no share;
for the discharge of firearms is directed against a body of men —
an abstract enemy, not individual combatants. The warrior goes
to meet deadly peril calmly, sacrificing himself for the common
weal; and the valor of cultivated nations is characterized by the
very fact, that it does not rely on the strong arm alone, but places
was needed. So, at an earlier date, 1302, on occasion of a contest
between Pope Boniface and Philip the Fair, the Assembly of the
States convoked by the latter had offered opposition to the Pope.
For states and communities had arrived at the consciousness of
independent moral worth. — Various causes had united to
weaken the papal authority: the Great Schism of the Church,
which led men to doubt the Pope’s infallibility, gave occasion to
the decisions of the Councils of Constance and Basle, which
assumed an authority superior to that of the Pope, and therefore
deposed and appointed Popes. The numerous attempts directed
against the ecclesiastical system confirmed the necessity of a
reformation. Arnold of Brescia, Wickliffe, and Huss met with
sympathy in contending against the dogma of the papal
vicegerency of Christ, and the gross abuses that disgraced the
hierarchy. These attempts were, however, only partial in their
scope. On the one hand the time was not yet ripe for a more
comprehensive onslaught; on the other hand the assailants in
question did not strike at the heart of the matter, but (especially
the two latter) attacked the teaching of the Church chiefly with
the weapons of erudition, and consequently failed to excite a
deep interest among the people at large.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 426
But the ecclesiastical principle had a more dangerous foe in the
incipient formation of political organizations, than in the
antagonists above referred to. A common object, an aim
intrinsically possessed of perfect moral validity,34 presented itself
to secularity in the formation of states; and to this aim of
community the will, the desire, the caprice of the individual
submitted themselves. The hardness characteristic of the selfseeking
quality of “Heart,” maintaining its position of isolation
— the knotty heart of oak underlying the national temperament
of the Germans — was broken down and mellowed by the
terrible discipline of the Middle Ages. The two iron rods which
were the instruments of this discipline were the Church and
serfdom. The Church drove the “Heart” [Gemüth] to desperation
— made Spirit pass through the severest bondage, so that the
soul was no longer its own; but it did not degrade it to Hindoo
torpor, for Christianity is an intrinsically spiritual principle and,
as such, has a boundless elasticity. In the same way serfdom,
which made a man’s body not his own, but the property of
another, dragged humanity through all the barbarism of slavery
and unbridled desire, and the latter was destroyed by its own
violence. It was not so much from slavery as through slavery that
humanity was emancipated. For barbarism, lust, injustice
constitute evil: man, bound fast in its fetters, is unfit for morality
and religiousness; and it is from this intemperate and
ungovernable state of volition that the discipline in question
emancipated him. The Church fought the battle with the violence
of rude sensuality in a temper equally wild and terroristic with
that of its antagonist: it prostrated the latter by dint of the terrors
