Consciousness that has received an abstract culture, and whose
sphere is the Understanding [Verstand] can be indifferent to
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 465
Religion, but Religion is the general form in which Truth exists
for non-abstract consciousness. And the Protestant Religion does
not admit of two kinds of consciences, while in the Catholic
world the Holy stands on the one side and on the other side
abstraction opposed to Religion, that is to its superstition and its
truth. That formal, individual Will is in virtue of the abstract
which is just and moral belongs to the essential, independent,
intrinsically universal Will; and if we would know what Right
really is, we must abstract from inclination, impulse and desire
as the particular; i.e., we must know what the Will is in itself.
For benevolent, charitable, social impulses are nothing more than
impulses — to which others of a different class are opposed.
What the Will is in itself can be known only when these specific
and contradictory forms of volition have been eliminated. Then
Will appears as Will, in its abstract essence. The Will is Free
only when it does not will anything alien, extrinsic, foreign to
itself (for as long as it does so, it is dependent), but wills itself
alone — wills the Will. This is absolute Will — the volition to
be free. Will making itself its own object is the basis of all Right
and Obligation — consequently of all statutory determinations
of Right, categorical imperatives, and enjoined obligations. The
Freedom of the Will per se, is the principle and substantial basis
of all Right — is itself absolute, inherently eternal Right, and the
Supreme Right in comparison with other specific Rights; nay, it
is even that by which Man becomes Man, and is therefore the
fundamental principle of Spirit. But the next question is: How
does Will assume a definite form? For in willing itself, it is
nothing but an identical reference to itself; but, in point of fact,
it wills something specific: there are, we know, distinct and
special Duties and Rights. A particular application, a definite
form of Will, is desiderated; for pure Will is its own object, its
own application, which, as far as this showing goes, is no object,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 463
no application. In fact, in this form it is nothing more than formal
Will. But the metaphysical process by which this abstract Will
develops itself, so as to attain a definite form of Freedom, and
how Rights and Duties are evolved therefrom, this is not the
place to discuss.42 It may however be remarked that the same
principle obtained speculative recognition in Germany, in the
Kantian Philosophy. According to it the simple unity of Selfconsciousness,
the Ego, constitutes the absolutely independent
Freedom, and is the fountain of all general conceptions — i.e.,
all conceptions elaborated by Thought — Theoretical Reason;
and likewise of the highest of all practical determinations [or
conceptions] — Practical Reason, as free and pure Will; and
Rationality of Will is none other than the maintaining one’s self
in pure Freedom — willing this and this alone — Right purely
for the sake of Right, Duty purely for the sake of Duty. Among
the Germans this view assumed no other form than that of
tranquil theory; but the French wished to give it practical effect.
Two questions, therefore, suggest themselves: Why did this
principle of Freedom remain merely formal?43 and why did the
French alone, and not the Germans, set about realizing it?
With the formal principle more significant categories were
indeed connected: one of the chief of these (for instance) was
Society, and that which is advantageous for Society: but the aim
of Society is itself political — that of the State (vid. “Droits de
l’homme et du citoyen,” 1791) — the conservation of Natural
Rights; but Natural Right is Freedom, and, as further determined,
it is Equality of Rights before the Law. A direct connection is
manifest here, for Equality, Parity, is the result of the
comparison of many;44 the “Many” in question being human
beings, whose essential characteristic is the same, viz., Freedom.
That principle remains formal, because it originated with abstract
Thought — with the Understanding, which is primarily the selfconsciousness
of Pure Reason, and as direct [unreflected,
undeveloped] is abstract. As yet, nothing further is developed
from it, for it still maintains an adverse position to Religion, i.e.
to the concrete absolute substance of the Universe.
As respects the second question — why the French
immediately passed over from the theoretical to the practical,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 464
while the Germans contented themselves with theoretical
abstraction, it might be said: the French are hot-headed [ils ont
contending for the principle of absolutism: Frederick on the
contrary took up the Protestant principle in its secular aspect; and
though he was by no means favorable to religious controversies,
and did not side with one party or the other, he had the
consciousness of Universality, which is the profoundest depth to
which Spirit can attain, and is Thought conscious of its own
inherent power.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 458
Chapter III. The Éclaircissement and Revolution39
Protestantism had introduced the principle of Subjectivity,
importing religious emancipation and inward harmony, but
accompanying this with the belief in Subjectivity as Evil, and in
a power [adverse to man’s highest interests] whose embodiment
is “the World.” Within the Catholic pale also, the casuistry of the
Jesuits brought into vogue interminable investigations, as tedious
and wire-drawn as those in which the scholastic theology
delighted, respecting the subjective spring of the Will and the
motives that affect it. This Dialectic, which unsettles all
particular judgments and opinions, transmuting the Evil into
Good and Good into Evil, left at last nothing remaining but the
mere action of subjectivity itself, the Abstractum of Spirit —
Thought. Thought contemplates everything under the form of
Universality, and is consequently the impulsion towards and
production of the Universal. In that elder scholastic theology the
real subject-matter of investigation — the doctrine of the Church
— remained an ultramundane affair; in the Protestant theology
also Spirit still sustained a relation to the Ultramundane; for on
the one side we have the will of the individual — the Spirit of
Man — I, myself, and on the other the Grace of God, the Holy
Ghost; and so in the Wicked, the Devil. But in Thought, Self
moves within the limits of its own sphere; that with which it is
occupied — its objects are as absolutely present to it [as they
were distinct and separate in the intellectual grade above
mentioned] ; for in thinking I must elevate the object to
Universality.40 This is utter and absolute Freedom, for the pure
Ego, like pure Light, is with itself alone [is not involved with any
alien principle] ; thus that which is diverse from itself, sensuous
or spiritual, no longer presents an object of dread, for in
contemplating such diversity it is inwardly free and can freely
confront it. A practical interest makes use of, consumes the
objects offered to it: a theoretical interest calmly contemplates
them, assured that in themselves they present no alien element.
— Consequently, the ne plus ultra of Inwardness, of
Subjectiveness, is Thought. Man is not free, when he is not
thinking; for except when thus engaged he sustains a relation to
the world around him as to another, an alien form of being. This
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 459
comprehension — the penetration of the Ego into and beyond
other forms of being with the most profound self-certainty [the
identity of subjective and objective Reason being recognized],
directly involves the harmonization of Being: for it must be
observed that the unity of Thought with its Object is already
implicitly present [i.e., in the fundamental constitution of the
Universe], for Reason is the substantial basis of Consciousness
as well as of the External and Natural. Thus that which presents
itself as the Object of Thought is no longer an absolutely distinct
form of existence [ein Jenseits], not of an alien and grossly
substantial [as opposed to intelligible] nature.
Thought is the grade to which Spirit has now advanced. It
involves the Harmony of Being in its purest essence, challenging
the external world to exhibit the same Reason which Subject [the
Ego] possesses. Spirit perceives that Nature — the World —
must also be an embodiment of Reason, for God created it on
principles of Reason. An interest in the contemplation and
comprehension of the present world became universal. Nature
embodies Universality, inasmuch as it is nothing other than
Sorts, Genera, Power, Gravitation, etc., phenomenally presented.
Thus Experimental Science became the science of the World; for
experimental science involves on the one hand the observation
of phenomena, on the other hand also the discovery of the Law,
the essential being, the hidden force that causes those phenomena
— thus reducing the data supplied by observation to their simple
principles. Intellectual consciousness was first extricated from
that sophistry of thought, which unsettles everything, by
Descartes. As it was the purely German nations among whom
the principle of Spirit first manifested itself, so it was by the
Romanic nations that the abstract idea (to which the character
assigned them above — viz., that of internal schism, more
readily conducted them) was first comprehended. Experimental
science therefore very soon made its way among them (in
common with the Protestant English), but especially among the
Italians. It seemed to men as if God had but just created the
moon and stars, plants and animals, as if the laws of the universe
were now established for the first time; for only then did they
feel a real interest in the universe, when they recognized their
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 460
own Reason in the Reason which pervades it. The human eye
became clear, perception quick, thought active and
interpretative. The discovery of the laws of Nature enabled men
to contend against the monstrous superstition of the time, as also
against all notions of mighty alien powers which magic alone
could conquer. The assertion was even ventured on, and that by
Catholics not less than by Protestants, that the External [and
Material], with which the Church insisted upon associating
superhuman virtue, was external and material, and nothing more
— that the Host was simply dough, the relics of the Saints mere
bones. The independent authority of Subjectivity was maintained
against belief founded on authority, and the Laws of Nature were
recognized as the only bond connecting phenomena with
phenomena. Thus all miracles were disallowed: for Nature is a
system of known and recognized Laws; Man is at home in it, and
that only passes for truth in which he finds himself at home; he
is free through the acquaintance he has gained with Nature. Nor
was thought less vigorously directed to the Spiritual side of
things: Right and [Social] Morality came to be looked upon as
having their foundation in the actual present Will of man,
whereas formerly it was referred only to the command of God
felt when an Archbishop of Cologne attempted to make his archepiscopate
a secular princedom for himself and his family. Their
confessors made it a matter of conscience with Catholic princes
to wrest estates that had been the property of the Church out of
the hands of the heretics. In Germany, however, the condition of
things was favorable to Protestantism in as far as the several
territories which had been imperial fiefs, had become
independent principalities. But in countries like Austria, the
princes were indifferent to Protestants, or even hostile to them;
and in France they were not safe in the exercise of their religion
except as protected by fortresses. War was the indispensable
preliminary to the security of Protestants ; for the question was
not one of simple conscience, but involved decisions respecting
public and private property which had been taken possession of
in contravention of the rights of the Church, and whose
restitution it demanded. A condition of absolute mistrust
supervened; absolute, because mistrust bound up with the
religious conscience was its root. The Protestant princes and
towns formed at that time a feeble union, and the defensive
operations they conducted were much feebler still. After they had
been worsted, Maurice the Elector of Saxony, by an utterly
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 454
unexpected and adventurous piece of daring, extorted a peace,
itself of doubtful interpretation, and which left the real sources
of embitterment altogether untouched. It was necessary to fight
out the battle from the very beginning. This took place in the
Thirty Years’ War, in which first Denmark and then Sweden
undertook the cause of freedom. The former was compelled to
quit the field, but the latter under Gustavus Adolphus — that
hero of the North of glorious memory — played a part which
was so much the more brilliant inasmuch as it began to wage war
with the vast force of the Catholics, alone — without the help of
the Protestant states of the Empire. The powers of Europe, with
a few exceptions, precipitate themselves on Germany — flowing
back towards it as to the fountain from which they had originally
issued, and where now the right of inwardness that has come to
manifest itself in the sphere of religion, and that of internal
independence and severalty is to be fought out. The struggle ends
without an Ideal result — without having attained the
consciousness of a principle as an intellectual concept — in the
exhaustion of all parties, in a scene of utter desolation, where all
the contending forces have been wrecked; it issues in letting
parties simply take their course and maintain their existence on
the basis of external power. The issue is in fact exclusively of a
political nature.
In England also, war was indispensable to the establishment of
the Protestant Church: the struggle was in this case directed
against the sovereigns, who were secretly attached to
Catholicism because they found the principle of absolute sway
confirmed by its doctrines. The fanaticized people rebelled
against the assumption of absolute sovereign power — importing
that Kings are responsible to God alone (i.e., to the Father
Confessor) — and in opposition to Catholic externality, unfurled
the banner of extreme subjectivity in Puritanism — a principle
which, developing itself in the real world, presents an aspect
partly of enthusiastic elevation, partly of ridiculous incongruity.
The enthusiasts of England, like those of Münster, were for
having the State governed directly by the fear of God; the
soldiery sharing the same fanatical views prayed while they
fought for the cause they had espoused. But a military leader
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 455
now has the physical force of the country and consequently the
government in his hands: for in the State there must be
government, and Cromwell knew what governing is. He,
therefore, made himself ruler, and sent that praying parliament
about their business. With his death however his right to
authority vanished also, and the old dynasty regained possession
of the throne. Catholicism, we may observe, is commended to
the support of princes as promoting the security of their
government — a position supposed to be particularly manifest if
the Inquisition be connected with the government; the former
constituting the bulwark of the latter. But such a security is based
on a slavish religious obedience, and is limited to those grades of
human development in which the political constitution and the
whole legal system still rest on the basis of actual positive
possession; but if the constitution and laws are to be founded on
a veritable eternal Right, then security is to be found only in the
Protestant religion, in whose principle Rational Subjective
Freedom also attains development. The Dutch too offered a
vigorous opposition to the Catholic principle as bound up with
the Spanish sovereignty. Belgium was still attached to the
Catholic religion and remained subject to Spain: on the contrary,
the northern part of the Netherlands — Holland — stood its
ground with heroic valor against its oppressors. The trading
class, the guilds and companies of marksmen formed a militia
whose heroic courage was more than a match for the then
famous Spanish infantry. Just as the Swiss peasants had resisted
the chivalry of Austria, so here the trading cities held out against
disciplined troops. During this struggle on the Continent itself,
the Dutch fitted out fleets and deprived the Spaniards of part of
their colonial possessions, from which all their wealth was
derived. As independence was secured to Holland in its holding
to the Protestant principle, so that of Poland was lost through its
endeavor to suppress that principle in the case of dissidents.
Through the Peace of Westphalia the Protestant Church had
been acknowledged as an independent one — to the great
confusion and humiliation of Catholicism. This peace has often
passed for the palladium of Germany, as having established its
political constitution. But this constitution was in fact a
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 456
confirmation of the particular rights of the countries into which
Germany had been broken up. It involves no thought, no
conception of the proper aim of a state. We should consult
“Hippolytus à lapide” (a book which, written before the
conclusion of the peace, had a great influence on the condition
of the Empire) if we would become acquainted with the character
of that German freedom of which so much is made. In the peace
in question the establishment of a complete particularity, the
determination of all relations on the principle of private right is
the object manifestly contemplated — a constituted anarchy,
such as the world had never before seen; — i.e., the position that
an Empire is properly a unity, a totality, a state, while yet all
relations are determined so exclusively on the principle of private
right that the privilege of all the constituent parts of that Empire
to act for themselves contrarily to the interest of the whole, or to
neglect that which its interest demands and which is even
required by law — is guaranteed and secured by the most
inviolable sanctions. Immediately after this settlement, it was
shown what the German Empire was as a state in relation to
other states: it waged ignominious wars with the Turks, for
deliverance from whom Vienna was indebted to Poland. Still
more ignominious was its relation to France, which took
possession in time of peace of free cities, the bulwarks of
Germany, and of flourishing provinces, and retained them
undisturbed.
This constitution, which completely terminated the career of
Germany as an Empire, was chiefly the work of Richelieu, by
whose assistance — Romish Cardinal though he was — religious
freedom in Germany was preserved. Richelieu, with a view to
further the interests of the State whose affairs he superintended,
adopted the exact opposite of that policy which he promoted in
the case of its enemies; for he reduced the latter to political
impotence by ratifying the political independence of the several
parts of the Empire, while at home he destroyed the
independence of the Protestant party. His fate has consequently
resembled that of many great statesmen, inasmuch as he has been
cursed by his countrymen, while his enemies have looked upon
the work by which he ruined them as the most sacred goal of
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 457
their desires — the consummation of their rights and liberties.
The result of the struggle therefore was the forcibly achieved
and now politically ratified coexistence of religious parties,
forming political communities whose relations are determined
according to prescriptive principles of civil or [rather, for such
their true nature was] of private right.
The Protestant Church increased and so perfected the stability
of its political existence by the fact that one of the states which
had adopted the principles of the Reformation raised itself to the
position of an independent European power. This power was
destined to start into a new life with Protestantism: Prussia, viz.,
which making its appearance at the end of the seventeenth
century, was indebted, if not for origination, yet certainly for the
consolidation of its strength, to Frederick the Great; and the
Seven Years’ War was the struggle by which that consolidation
was accomplished. Frederick II demonstrated the independent
vigor of his power by resisting that of almost all Europe — the
union of its leading states. He appeared as the hero of
Protestantism, and that not individually merely, like Gustavus
Adolphus, but as the ruler of a state. The Seven Years’ War was
indeed in itself not a war of religion; but it was so in view of its
ultimate issues, and in the disposition of the soldiers as well as
of the potentates under whose banner they fought. The Pope
consecrated the sword of Field-Marshal Daun, and the chief
object which the Allied Powers proposed to themselves was the
crushing of Prussia as the bulwark of the Protestant Church. But
Frederick the Great not only made Prussia one of the great
powers of Europe as a Protestant power, but was also a
philosophical King — an altogether peculiar and unique
phenomenon in modern times.
There had been English Kings who were subtle theologians,
recruited from a body of Christian boys of handsome and
vigorous proportions, brought together chiefly by means of
annual conscriptions among the Greek subjects of the Porte,
strictly educated in the Moslem faith, and exercised in arms from
early youth. Without parents, without brothers or sisters, without
wives, they were, like the monks, an altogether isolated and
terrible corps. The Eastern European powers were obliged to
make common cause against the Turks — viz.: Austria, Hungary,
Venice and Poland. The battle of Lepanto saved Italy, and
perhaps all Europe, from a barbarian inundation.
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 453
An event of special importance following in the train of the
Reformation was the struggle of the Protestant Church for
political existence. The Protestant Church, even in its original
aspect, was too intimately connected with secular interests not to
occasion secular complications and political contentions
respecting political possession. The subjects of Catholic princes
become Protestant, have and make claims to ecclesiastical
property, change the nature of the tenure, and repudiate or
decline the discharge of those ecclesiastical functions to whose
due performance the emoluments are attached (jura stoloe).
Moreover a Catholic government is bound to be the brachium
seculare of the Church; the Inquisition, e.g., never put a man to
death, but simply declared him a heretic, as a kind of jury; he
was then punished according to civil laws. Again, innumerable
occasions of offence and irritation originated with processions
and feasts, the carrying of the Host through the streets,
withdrawals from convents, etc. Still more excitement would be
and likewise of the highest of all practical determinations [or
conceptions] — Practical Reason, as free and pure Will; and
Rationality of Will is none other than the maintaining one’s self
in pure Freedom — willing this and this alone — Right purely
for the sake of Right, Duty purely for the sake of Duty. Among
the Germans this view assumed no other form than that of
tranquil theory; but the French wished to give it practical effect.
Two questions, therefore, suggest themselves: Why did this
principle of Freedom remain merely formal?43 and why did the
French alone, and not the Germans, set about realizing it?
With the formal principle more significant categories were
indeed connected: one of the chief of these (for instance) was
Society, and that which is advantageous for Society: but the aim
of Society is itself political — that of the State (vid. “Droits de
l’homme et du citoyen,” 1791) — the conservation of Natural
Rights; but Natural Right is Freedom, and, as further determined,
it is Equality of Rights before the Law. A direct connection is
manifest here, for Equality, Parity, is the result of the
comparison of many;44 the “Many” in question being human
beings, whose essential characteristic is the same, viz., Freedom.
That principle remains formal, because it originated with abstract
Thought — with the Understanding, which is primarily the selfconsciousness
of Pure Reason, and as direct [unreflected,
undeveloped] is abstract. As yet, nothing further is developed
from it, for it still maintains an adverse position to Religion, i.e.
to the concrete absolute substance of the Universe.
As respects the second question — why the French
immediately passed over from the theoretical to the practical,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 464
while the Germans contented themselves with theoretical
abstraction, it might be said: the French are hot-headed [ils ont
except as protected by fortresses. War was the indispensable
preliminary to the security of Protestants ; for the question was
not one of simple conscience, but involved decisions respecting
public and private property which had been taken possession of
in contravention of the rights of the Church, and whose
restitution it demanded. A condition of absolute mistrust
supervened; absolute, because mistrust bound up with the
religious conscience was its root. The Protestant princes and
towns formed at that time a feeble union, and the defensive
operations they conducted were much feebler still. After they had
been worsted, Maurice the Elector of Saxony, by an utterly
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 454
unexpected and adventurous piece of daring, extorted a peace,
itself of doubtful interpretation, and which left the real sources
of embitterment altogether untouched. It was necessary to fight
out the battle from the very beginning. This took place in the
Thirty Years’ War, in which first Denmark and then Sweden
undertook the cause of freedom. The former was compelled to
quit the field, but the latter under Gustavus Adolphus — that
of hell, and held it in perpetual subjection, in order to break
down the spirit of barbarism and to tame it into repose. Theology
declares that every man has this struggle to pass through, since
he is by nature evil, and only by passing through a state of
mental laceration arrives at the certainty of Reconciliation. But
granting this, it must on the other hand be maintained, that the
form of the contest is very much altered when the conditions of
its commencement are different, and when that reconciliation has
had an actual realization. The path of torturous discipline is in
that case dispensed with (it does indeed make its appearance at
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 427
a later date, but in a quite different form), for the waking up of
consciousness finds man surrounded by the element of a moral
state of society. The phase of negation is, indeed, a necessary
element -in human development, but it has now assumed the
tranquil form of education, so that all the terrible characteristics
of that inward struggle vanish.
Humanity has now attained the consciousness of a real internal
harmonization of Spirit, and a good conscience in regard to
actuality — to secular existence. The Human Spirit has come to
stand on its own basis. In the self-consciousness to which man
has thus advanced, there is no revolt against the Divine, but a
manifestation of that better subjectivity, which recognizes the
Divine in its own being; which is imbued with the Good and
True, and which directs its activities to general and liberal
objects bearing the stamp of rationality and beauty.
Art and Science as Putting a Period to the Middle Ages
Humanity beholds its spiritual firmament restored to serenity.
With that tranquil settling down of the world into political order
which we have been contemplating, was conjoined an exaltation
of Spirit to a nobler grade of humanity in a sphere involving
more comprehensive and concrete interests than that with which
political existence is concerned. The Sepulchre — that caput
mortuum of Spirit — and the Ultramundane cease to absorb
human attention. The principle of a specific and definite
embodiment of the Infinite — that desideratum which urged the
world to the Crusades, now developed itself in a quite different
direction, viz. in secular existence asserting an independent
ground: Spirit made its embodiment an outward one and found
a congenial sphere in the secular life thus originated. The
Church, however, maintained its former position, and retained
the principle in question in its original form. Yet even in this
case, that principle ceased to be limited to a bare outward
existence [a sacred thing, the Host, e.g.]: it was transformed and
elevated by Art. Art spiritualizes — animates the mere outward
and material object of adoration with a form which expresses
soul, sentiment, Spirit; so that piety has not a bare sensuous
for non-abstract consciousness. And the Protestant Religion does
not admit of two kinds of consciences, while in the Catholic
world the Holy stands on the one side and on the other side
abstraction opposed to Religion, that is to its superstition and its
truth. That formal, individual Will is in virtue of the abstract
which is just and moral belongs to the essential, independent,
intrinsically universal Will; and if we would know what Right
really is, we must abstract from inclination, impulse and desire
as the particular; i.e., we must know what the Will is in itself.
For benevolent, charitable, social impulses are nothing more than
impulses — to which others of a different class are opposed.
What the Will is in itself can be known only when these specific
and contradictory forms of volition have been eliminated. Then
Will appears as Will, in its abstract essence. The Will is Free
only when it does not will anything alien, extrinsic, foreign to
itself (for as long as it does so, it is dependent), but wills itself
alone — wills the Will. This is absolute Will — the volition to
be free. Will making itself its own object is the basis of all Right
and Obligation — consequently of all statutory determinations
of Right, categorical imperatives, and enjoined obligations. The
Freedom of the Will per se, is the principle and substantial basis
of all Right — is itself absolute, inherently eternal Right, and the
Supreme Right in comparison with other specific Rights; nay, it
is even that by which Man becomes Man, and is therefore the
fundamental principle of Spirit. But the next question is: How
does Will assume a definite form? For in willing itself, it is
nothing but an identical reference to itself; but, in point of fact,
it wills something specific: there are, we know, distinct and
special Duties and Rights. A particular application, a definite
form of Will, is desiderated; for pure Will is its own object, its
own application, which, as far as this showing goes, is no object,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 463
no application. In fact, in this form it is nothing more than formal
Will. But the metaphysical process by which this abstract Will
develops itself, so as to attain a definite form of Freedom, and
how Rights and Duties are evolved therefrom, this is not the
place to discuss.42 It may however be remarked that the same
principle obtained speculative recognition in Germany, in the
Kantian Philosophy. According to it the simple unity of Selfconsciousness,
the Ego, constitutes the absolutely independent
Freedom, and is the fountain of all general conceptions — i.e.,
all conceptions elaborated by Thought — Theoretical Reason;
its confidence essentially in the intelligence, the generalship, the
character of its commanders; and, as was the case among the
ancients, in a firm combination and unity of spirit on the part of
the forces they command.
In Italy, as already noticed, we behold the same spectacle as in
Germany — the attainment of an independent position by
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 422
isolated centres of power. In that country, warfare in the hand of
the Condottieri became a regular business. The towns were
obliged to attend to their trading concerns, and therefore
employed mercenary troops, whose leaders often became feudal
lords; Francis Sforza even made himself Duke of Milan. In
Florence, the Medici, a family of merchants, rose to power. On
the other hand, the larger cities of Italy reduced under their sway
several smaller ones and many feudal chiefs. A Papal territory
was likewise formed. There, also, a very large number of feudal
lords had made themselves independent; by degrees they all
became subject to the one sovereignty of the Pope. How
thoroughly equitable in the view of social morality such a
subjugation was, is evident from Machiavelli’s celebrated work
“The Prince.” This book has often been thrown aside in disgust,
as replete with the maxims of the most revolting tyranny; but
nothing worse can be urged against it than that the writer, having
the profound consciousness of the necessity for the formation of
a State, has here exhibited the principles on which alone states
could be founded in the circumstances of the times. The chiefs
who asserted an isolated independence, and the power they
arrogated, must be entirely subdued; and though we cannot
reconcile with our idea of Freedom, the means which he
proposes as the only efficient ones, and regards as perfectly
justifiable — inasmuch as they involve the most reckless
violence, all kinds of deception, assassination, and so forth — we
must nevertheless confess that the feudal nobility, whose power
was to be subdued, were assailable in no other way, since an
indomitable contempt for principle, and an utter depravity of
morals, were thoroughly engrained in them.
In France we find the converse of that which occurred in
Germany and Italy. For many centuries the Kings of France
possessed only a very small domain, so that many of their vassals
were more powerful than themselves: but it was a great
advantage to the royal dignity in France, that the principle of
hereditary monarchy was firmly established there. The
consideration it enjoyed was increased by the circumstance that
the corporations and cities had their rights and privileges
confirmed by the king, and that the appeals to the supreme feudal
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 423
tribunal — the Court of Peers, consisting of twelve members
enjoying that dignity — became increasingly frequent. The
king’s influence was extended by his affording that protection
which only the throne could give. But that which essentially
secured respect for royalty, even among the powerful vassals,
was the increasing personal power of the sovereign. In various
ways, by inheritance, by marriage, by force of arms, etc., the
Kings had come into possession of many Earldoms
[Grafschaften] and several Duchies. The Dukes of Normandy
had, however, become Kings of England; and thus a formidable
power confronted France, whose interior lay open to it by way of
Normandy. Besides this there were powerful Duchies still
remaining; nevertheless, the King was not a mere feudal suzerain
[Lehnsherr] like the German Emperors, but had become a
territorial possessor [Landesherr] : he had a number of barons
and cities under him, who were subject to his immediate
jurisdiction; and Louis IX succeeded in rendering appeals to the
royal tribunal common throughout his kingdom. The towns
attained a position of greater importance in the state. For when
the king needed money, and all his usual resources — such as
taxes and forced contributions of all kinds — were exhausted, he
made application to the towns and entered into separate
negotiations with them. It was Philip the Fair who, in the year
1302, first convoked the deputies of the towns as a Third Estate
in conjunction with the clergy and the barons. All indeed that
they were in the first instance concerned with was the authority
of the sovereign as the power that had convoked them, and the
raising of taxes as the object of their convocation; but the States
nevertheless secured an importance and weight in the kingdom,
and as the natural result, an influence on legislation also. A fact
which is particularly remarkable is the proclamation issued by
the kings of France, giving permission to the bondsmen on the
crown lands to purchase their freedom at a moderate price. In the
way we have indicated the kings of France very soon attained
great power; while the flourishing state of the poetic art in the
hands of the Troubadours, and the growth of the scholastic
theology, whose especial centre was Paris, gave France a culture
superior to that of the other European states, and which secured
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 424
the respect of foreign nations.
England, as we have already had occasion to mention, was
subjugated by William the Conqueror, Duke of Normandy.
William introduced the feudal system into it, and divided the
kingdom into fiefs, which he granted almost exclusively to his
Norman followers. He himself retained considerable crown
possessions; the vassals were under obligation to perform service
in the field, and to aid in administering justice: the King was the
guardian of all vassals under age; they could not marry without
his consent. Only by degrees did the barons and the towns attain
a position of importance. It was especially in the disputes and
struggles for the throne that they acquired considerable weight.
When the oppressive rule and fiscal exactions of the Kings
became intolerable, contentions and even war ensued: the barons
compelled King John to swear to Magna Charta, the basis of
English liberty, i.e., more particularly of the privileges of the
nobility. Among the liberties thus secured, that which concerns
the administration of justice was the chief: no Englishman was
to be deprived of personal freedom, property, or life without the
judicial verdict of his peers. Every one, moreover, was to be
entitled to the free disposition of his property. Further, the King
was to impose no taxes without the consent of the archbishops,
bishops, earls, and barons. The towns, also, favored by the Kings
in opposition to the barons, soon elevated themselves into a
Third Estate and to representation in the Commons’ House of
Parliament. Yet the King was always very powerful, if he
possessed strength of character: his crown estates procured for
him due consideration; in later times, however, these were
gradually alienated — given away — so that the King was
reduced to apply for subsidies to the parliament.
We shall not pursue the minute and specifically historic details
that concern the incorporation of principalities with states, or the
dissensions and contests that accompanied such incorporations.
We have only to add that the kings, when by weakening the
feudal constitution, they had attained a higher degree of power,
began to use that power against each other in the undisguised
interest of their own dominion. Thus France and England carried
on wars with each other for a century. The kings were always
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 425
endeavoring to make foreign conquests; the towns, which had the
largest share of the burdens and expenses of such wars, were
opposed to them, and in order to placate them the kings granted
them important privileges.
The Popes endeavored to make the disturbed state of society
to which each of these changes gave rise, an occasion for the
intervention- of their authority; but the interest of the growth of
states was too firmly established to allow them to make their
own interest of absolute authority valid against it. Princes and
peoples were indifferent to papal clamor urging them to new
crusades. The Emperor Louis set to work to deduce from
Aristotle, the Bible, and the Roman Law a refutation of the
assumptions of the Papal See; and the electors declared at the
Diet held at Rense in 1338, and afterwards still more decidedly
at the Imperial Diet held at Frankfort, that they would defend the
liberties and hereditary rights of the Empire, and that to make the
choice of a Roman Emperor or King valid, no papal confirmationhad been handed down from the Middle Age, still retained
validity. Infinitely important is this form of private rights, which
the organic constituents of the executive power of the State have
assumed. At their apex we find a fixed and positive principle —
the exclusive right of one family to the possession of the throne,
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 447
and the hereditary succession of sovereigns further restricted by
the law of primogeniture. This gives the State an immovable
centre. The fact that Germany was an elective empire prevented
its being consolidated into one state; and for the same reason
Poland has vanished from the circle of independent states. The
State must have a final decisive will: but if an individual is to be
the final deciding power, he must be so in a direct and natural
way, not as determined by choice and theoretic views, etc. Even
among the free Greeks the oracle was the external power which
decided their policy on critical occasions; here birth is the oracle
— something independent of any arbitrary volition. But the
circumstance that the highest station in a monarchy is assigned
to a family, seems to indicate that the sovereignty is the private
property of that family. As such that sovereignty would seem to
be divisible; but since the idea of division of power is opposed
to the principle of the state, the rights of the monarch and his
family required to be more strictly defined. Sovereign possession
is not a peculium of the individual ruler, but is consigned to the
dynastic family as a trust; and the estates of the realm possess
security that that trust shall be faithfully discharged, for they
have to guard the unity of the body politic. Thus, then, royal
possession no longer denotes a kind of private property, private
possession of estates, demesnes, jurisdiction, etc., but has
become a State-property — a function pertaining to and involved
with the State.
Equally important, and connected with that just noticed, is the
change of executive powers, functions, duties and rights, which
naturally belong to the State, but which had become private
property and private contracts or obligations — into possession
conferred by the State. The rights of seigneurs and barons were
annulled, and they were obliged to content themselves with
official positions in the State. This transformation of the rights of
vassals into official functions took place in the several kingdoms
in various ways. In France, e.g., the great Barons, who were
governors of provinces, who could claim such offices as a matter
of right, and who like the Turkish Pashas, maintained a body of
troops with the revenues thence derived — troops which they
might at any moment bring into the field against the King —
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 448
were reduced to the position of mere landed proprietors or court
nobility, and those Pashalics became offices held under the
government; or the nobility were employed as officers —
generals of the army, an army belonging to the State. In this
aspect the origination of standing armies is so important an
event; for they supply the monarchy with an independent force
and are as necessary for the security of the central authority
against the rebellion of the subject individuals as for the defence
of the state against foreign enemies. The fiscal system indeed
had not as yet assumed a systematic character — the revenue
being derived from customs, taxes and tolls in countless variety,
besides the subsidies and contributions paid by the estates of the
realm; in return for which the right of presenting a statement of
grievances was conceded to them, as is now the case in Hungary.
— In Spain the spirit of chivalry had assumed a very beautiful
and noble form. This chivalric spirit, this knightly dignity,
degraded to a mere inactive sentiment of honor, has attained
notoriety as the Spanish grandezza. The Grandees were no
longer allowed to maintain troops of their own, and were also
withdrawn from the command of the armies; destitute of power
they had to content themselves as private persons with an empty
title. But the means by which the royal power in Spain was
consolidated, was the Inquisition. This, which was established
for the persecution of those who secretly adhered to Judaism, and
enjoined ab extra, written in the Old and New Testament, or
appearing in the form of particular Right [as opposed to that
based on general principles] in old parchments, as privilegia, or
in international compacts. What the nations acknowledge as
international Right was deduced empirically from observation (as
in the work of Grotius) ; then the source of the existing civil and
political law was looked for, after Cicero’s fashion, in those
instincts of men which Nature has planted in their hearts — e.g.,
the social instinct; next the principle of security for the person
and property of the citizens, and of the advantage of the
commonwealth — that which belongs to the class of “reasons of
State.” On these principles private rights were on the one hand
despotically contravened, but on the other hand such
contravention was the instrument of carrying out the general
objects of the State in opposition to mere positive or prescriptive
la tête près du bonnet]; but this is a superficial solution: the fact
is that the formal principle of philosophy in Germany encounters
a concrete real World in which Spirit finds inward satisfaction
and in which conscience is at rest. For on the one hand it was the
Protestant World itself which advanced so far in Thought as to
realize the absolute culmination of Self-Consciousness; on the
other hand, Protestantism enjoys, with respect to the moral and
legal relations of the real world, a tranquil confidence in the
[Honorable] Disposition of men — a sentiment, which, [in the
Protestant World,] constituting one and the same thing with
Religion, is the fountain of all the equitable arrangements that
prevail with regard to private right and the constitution of the
State. In Germany the éclaircissement was conducted in the
interest of theology: in France it immediately took up a position
of hostility to the Church. In Germany the entire compass of
secular relations had already undergone a change for the better;
those pernicious ecclesiastical institutes of celibacy, voluntary
pauperism, and laziness, had been already done away with; there
was no dead weight of enormous wealth attached to the Church,
and no constraint put upon Morality — a constraint which is the
source and occasion of vices; there was not that unspeakably
hurtful form of iniquity which arises from the interference of
spiritual power with secular law, nor that other of the Divine
Right of Kings, i.e. the doctrine that the arbitrary will of princes,
in virtue of their being “the Lord’s Anointed,” is divine and holy:
on the contrary their will is regarded as deserving of respect only
so far as in association with reason, it wisely contemplates Right,
Justice, and the weal of the community. The principle of
Thought, therefore, had been so far conciliated already;
moreover the Protestant World had a conviction that in the
Harmonization which had previously been evolved [in the sphere
of Religion] the principle which would result in a further
development of equity in the political sphere was already
present.

therefore only a direct knowledge [one not mediated by proofs]
on which this fury against the evil principle professed to be
based. It was indeed necessary to have recourse to evidence, but
the basis of these judicial processes was simply the belief that
certain individuals were possessed by the power of the Evil One.
This delusion raged among the nations in the sixteenth century
with the fury of a pestilence. The main impulse was suspicion.
The principle of suspicion assumes a similarly terrible shape
during the sway of the Roman Emperors, and under
Robespierre’s Reign of Terror; when mere disposition,
unaccompanied by any overt act or expression, was made an
object of punishment. Among the Catholics, it was the
Dominicans to whom (as was the Inquisition in all its branches)
the trials for witchcraft were intrusted. Father Spee, a noble
Jesuit, wrote a treatise against them (he is also the author of a
collection of fine poems bearing the title of “Trutznachtigall,”)
giving a full exposure of the terrible character of criminal justice
G.W.F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, 446
in proceedings of this kind. Torture, which was only to be
applied once, was continued until a confession was extorted. If
the accused fainted under the torture it was averred that the Devil
was giving them sleep: if convulsions supervened, it was said
that the Devil was laughing in them; if they held out steadfastly,
the Devil was supposed to give them power. These persecutions
spread like an epidemic sickness through Italy, France, Spain and
Germany. The earnest remonstrances of enlightened men, such
as Spec and others, already produced a considerable effect. But
it was Thomasius, a Professor of Halle, who first opposed this
prevalent superstition with very decided success. The entire
phenomenon is in itself most remarkable when we reflect that we
have not long been quit of this frightful barbarity (even as late as
the year 1780 a witch was publicly burned at Glarus in
Switzerland). Among the Catholics persecution was directed
against heretics as well as against witches: we might say indeed
that they were placed in one category; the unbelief of the heretics
was regarded as none other than the indwelling principle of Evil
— a possession similar to the other.
Leaving this abstract form of Subjectiveness we have now to
consider the secular side — the constitution of the State and the
advance of Universality — the recognition of the universal laws
of Freedom. This is the second and the essential point.
Chapter II. Influence of the Reformation on Political
Development.
In tracing the course of the political development of the period,
we observe in the first place the consolidation of Monarchy, and
the Monarch invested with an authority emanating from the
State. The incipient stage in the rise of royal power, and the
commencement of that unity which the states of Europe attained,
belong to a still earlier period. While these changes were going
forward, the entire body of private obligations and rights which
