CHAPTER I.

Chopin--Style and Improvements--The Adagio of the Second
Concerto--Funeral March--Psychological Character of the Compositions of
Chopin, &c., &c.


Deeply regretted as he may be by the whole body of artists, lamented by
all who have ever known him, we must still be permitted to doubt if
the time has even yet arrived in which he, whose loss is so peculiarly
deplored by ourselves, can be appreciated in accordance with his
just value, or occupy that high rank which in all probability will be
assigned him in the future.

If it has been often proved that "no one is a prophet in his own
country;" is it not equally true that the prophets, the men of the
future, who feel its life in advance, and prefigure it in their works,
are never recognized as prophets in their own times? It would be
presumptuous to assert that it can ever be otherwise. In vain may the
young generations of artists protest against the "Anti-progressives,"
whose invariable custom it is to assault and beat down the living with
the dead: time alone can test the real value, or reveal the hidden
beauties, either of musical compositions, or of kindred efforts in the
sister arts.

As the manifold forms of art are but different incantations, charged
with electricity from the soul of the artist, and destined to evoke
the latent emotions and passions in order to render them sensible,
intelligible, and, in some degree, tangible; so genius may be manifested
in the invention of new forms, adapted, it may be, to the expression
of feelings which have not yet surged within the limits of common
experience, and are indeed first evoked within the magic circle by the
creative power of artistic intuition. In arts in which sensation is
linked to emotion, without the intermediate assistance of thought and
reflection, the mere introduction of unaccustomed forms, of unused
modes, must present an obstacle to the immediate comprehension of any
very original composition. The surprise, nay, the fatigue, caused by
the novelty of the singular impressions which it awakens, will make it
appear to many as if written in a language of which they were ignorant,
and which that reason will in itself be sufficient to induce them to
pronounce a barbarous dialect. The trouble of accustoming the ear to it
will repel many who will, in consequence, refuse to make a study of it.
Through the more vivid and youthful organizations, less enthralled
by the chains of habit; through the more ardent spirits, won first by
curiosity, then filled with passion for the new idiom, must it penetrate
and win the resisting and opposing public, which will finally catch the
meaning, the aim, the construction, and at last render justice to its
qualities, and acknowledge whatever beauty it may contain. Musicians who
do not restrict themselves within the limits of conventional routine,
have, consequently, more need than other artists of the aid of time.
They cannot hope that death will bring that instantaneous plus-value to
their works which it gives to those of the painters. No musician could
renew, to the profit of his manuscripts, the deception practiced by one
of the great Flemish painters, who, wishing in his lifetime to benefit
by his future glory, directed his wife to spread abroad the news of his
death, in order that the pictures with which he had taken care to cover
the walls of his studio, might suddenly increase in value!

Whatever may be the present popularity of any part of the productions of
one, broken, by suffering long before taken by death, it is nevertheless
to be presumed that posterity will award to his works an estimation of
a far higher character, of a much more earnest nature, than has hitherto
been awarded them. A high rank must be assigned by the future historians
of music to one who distinguished himself in art by a genius for melody
so rare, by such graceful and remarkable enlargements of the harmonic
tissue; and his triumph will be justly preferred to many of far more
extended surface, though the works of such victors may be played and
replayed by the greatest number of instruments, and be sung and resung
by passing crowds of Prime Donne.

In confining himself exclusively to the Piano, Chopin has, in our
opinion, given proof of one of the most essential qualities of a
composer--a just appreciation of the form in which he possessed
the power to excel; yet this very fact, to which we attach so much
importance, has been injurious to the extent of his fame. It would have
been most difficult for any other writer, gifted with such high harmonic
and melodic powers, to have resisted the temptation of the SINGING of
the bow, the liquid sweetness of the flute, or the deafening swells of
the trumpet, which we still persist in believing the only fore-runner
of the antique goddess from whom we woo the sudden favors. What strong
conviction, based upon reflection, must have been requisite to have
induced him to restrict himself to a circle apparently so much more
barren; what warmth of creative genius must have been necessary to have
forced from its apparent aridity a fresh growth of luxuriant bloom,
unhoped for in such a soil! What intuitive penetration is repealed by
this exclusive choice, which, wresting the different effects of the
various instruments from their habitual domain, where the whole foam of
sound would have broken at their feet, transported them into a sphere,
more limited, indeed, but far more idealized! What confident perception
of the future powers of his instrument must have presided over his
voluntary renunciation of an empiricism, so widely spread, that another
would have thought it a mistake, a folly, to have wrested such great
thoughts from their ordinary interpreters! How sincerely should we
revere him for this devotion to the Beautiful for its own sake, which
induced him not to yield to the general propensity to scatter each light
spray of melody over a hundred orchestral desks, and enabled him to
augment the resources of art, in teaching how they may be concentrated
in a more limited space, elaborated at less expense of means, and
condensed in time!

Far from being ambitious of the uproar of an orchestra, Chopin was
satisfied to see his thought integrally produced upon the ivory of the
key-board; succeeding in his aim of losing nothing in power, without
pretending to orchestral effects, or to the brush of the scene-painter.
Oh! we have not yet studied with sufficient earnestness and attention
the designs of his delicate pencil, habituated as we are, in these
days, to consider only those composers worthy of a great name, who have
written at least half-a-dozen Operas, as many Oratorios, and various
Symphonies: vainly requiring every musician to do every thing, nay, a
little more than every thing. However widely diffused this idea may be,
its justice is, to say the least, highly problematical. We are far
from contesting the glory more difficult of attainment, or the real
superiority of the Epic poets, who display their splendid creations upon
so large a plan; but we desire that material proportion in music should
be estimated by the same measure which is applied to dimension in other
branches of the fine arts; as, for example, in painting, where a canvas
of twenty inches square, as the Vision of Ezekiel, or Le Cimetiere by
Ruysdael, is placed among the chefs d'oeuvre, and is more highly valued
than pictures of a far larger size, even though they might be from the
hands of a Rubens or a Tintoret. In literature, is Beranger less a great
poet, because he has condensed his thoughts within the narrow limits
of his songs? Does not Petrarch owe his fame to his Sonnets? and among
those who most frequently repeat their soothing rhymes, how many know
any thing of the existence of his long poem on Africa? We cannot doubt
that the prejudice which would deny the superiority of an artist--though
he should have produced nothing but such Sonatas as Franz Schubert has
given us--over one who has portioned out the insipid melodies of many
Operas, which it were useless to cite, will disappear; and that in
music, also, we will yet take into account the eloquence and ability
with which the thoughts and feelings are expressed, whatever may be
the size of the composition in which they are developed, or the means
employed to interpret them.

In making an analysis of the works of Chopin, we meet with beauties of a
high order, expressions entirely new, and a harmonic tissue as original
as erudite. In his compositions, boldness is always justified; richness,
even exuberance, never interferes with clearness; singularity never
degenerates into uncouth fantasticalness; the sculpturing is never
disorderly; the luxury of ornament never overloads the chaste eloquence
of the principal lines. His best works abound in combinations which
may be said to form an epoch in the handling of musical style. Daring,
brilliant and attractive, they disguise their profundity under so much
grace, their science under so many charms, that it is with difficulty
we free ourselves sufficiently from their magical enthrallment, to judge
coldly of their theoretical value. Their worth has, however, already
been felt; but it will be more highly estimated when the time arrives
for a critical examination of the services rendered by them to art
during that period of its course traversed by Chopin.

It is to him we owe the extension of chords, struck together in
arpeggio, or en batterie; the chromatic sinuosities of which his pages
offer such striking examples; the little groups of superadded notes,
falling like light drops of pearly dew upon the melodic figure. This
species of adornment had hitherto been modeled only upon the Fioritures
of the great Old School of Italian song; the embellishments for
the voice had been servilely copied by the Piano, although become
stereotyped and monotonous: he imparted to them the charm of novelty,
surprise and variety, unsuited for the vocalist, but in perfect keeping
with the character of the instrument. He invented the admirable harmonic
progressions which have given a serious character to pages, which, in
consequence of the lightness of their subject, made no pretension to any
importance. But of what consequence is the subject? Is it not the idea
which is developed through it, the emotion with which it vibrates,
which expands, elevates and ennobles it? What tender melancholy, what
subtlety, what sagacity in the master-pieces of La Fontaine, although
the subjects are so familiar, the titles so modest? Equally unassuming
are the titles and subjects of the Studies and Preludes; yet the
compositions of Chopin, so modestly named, are not the less types of
perfection in a mode created by himself, and stamped, like all his
other works, with the high impress of his poetic genius. Written in the
commencement of his career, they are characterized by a youthful
vigor not to be found in some of his subsequent works, even when more
elaborate, finished, and richer in combinations; a vigor, which is
entirely lost in his latest productions, marked by an over-excited
sensibility, a morbid irritability, and giving painful intimations of
his own state of suffering and exhaustion.

If it were our intention to discuss the development of Piano music in
the language of the Schools, we would dissect his magnificent pages,
which afford so rich a field for scientific observation. We would, in
the first place, analyze his Nocturnes, Ballades, Impromptus, Scherzos,
which are full of refinements of harmony never heard before; bold,
and of startling originality. We would also examine his Polonaises,
Mazourkas, Waltzes and Boleros. But this is not the time or place
for such a study, which would be interesting only to the adepts in
Counterpoint and Thoroughbass.

It is the feeling which overflows in all his works, which has rendered
them known and popular; feeling of a character eminently romantic,
subjective individual, peculiar to their author, yet awakening immediate
sympathy; appealing not alone to the heart of that country indebted
to him for yet one glory more, but to all who can be touched by the
misfortunes of exile, or moved by the tenderness of love. Not content
with success in the field in which he was free to design, with such
perfect grace, the contours chosen by himself, Chopin also wished to
fetter his ideal thoughts with classic chains. His Concertos and Sonatas
are beautiful indeed, but we may discern in them more effort than
inspiration. His creative genius was imperious, fantastic and impulsive.
His beauties were only manifested fully in entire freedom. We believe
he offered violence to the character of his genius whenever he sought to
subject it to rules, to classifications, to regulations not his own,
and which he could not force into harmony with the exactions of his own
mind. He was one of those original beings, whose graces are only fully
displayed when they have cut themselves adrift from all bondage, and
float on at their own wild will, swayed only by the ever undulating
impulses of their own mobile natures.

He was, perhaps, induced to desire this double success through the
example of his friend, Mickiewicz, who, having been the first to gift
his country with romantic poetry, forming a school in Sclavic literature
by the publication of his Dziady, and his romantic Ballads, as early
as 1818, proved afterwards, by the publication at his Grazyna and
Wallenrod, that he could triumph over the difficulties that classic
restrictions oppose to inspiration, and that, when holding the classic
lyre of the ancient poets, he was still master. In making analogous
attempts, we do not think Chopin has been equally successful. He could
not retain, within the square of an angular and rigid mould, that
floating and indeterminate contour which so fascinates us in his
graceful conceptions. He could not introduce in its unyielding lines
that shadowy and sketchy indecision, which, disguising the skeleton, the
whole frame-work of form, drapes it in the mist of floating vapors, such
as surround the white-bosomed maids of Ossian, when they permit
mortals to catch some vague, yet lovely outline, from their home in the
changing, drifting, blinding clouds.

Some of these efforts, however, are resplendent with a rare dignity of
style; and passages of exceeding interest, of surprising grandeur, may
be found among them. As an example of this, we cite the Adagio of the
Second Concerto, for which he evinced a decided preference, and which
he liked to repeat frequently. The accessory designs are in his best
manner, while the principal phrase is of an admirable breadth. It
alternates with a Recitative, which assumes a minor key, and which seems
to be its Antistrophe. The whole of this piece is of a perfection
almost ideal; its expression, now radiant with light, now full of
tender pathos. It seems as if one had chosen a happy vale of Tempe,
a magnificent landscape flooded with summer glow and lustre, as a
background for the rehearsal of some dire scene of mortal anguish. A
bitter and irreparable regret seizes the wildly-throbbing human heart,
even in the midst of the incomparable splendor of external nature. This
contrast is sustained by a fusion of tones, a softening of gloomy hues,
which prevent the intrusion of aught rude or brusque that might awaken
a dissonance in the touching impression produced, which, while saddening
joy, soothes and softens the bitterness of sorrow.

It would be impossible to pass in silence the Funeral March inserted in
the first Sonata, which was arranged for the orchestra, and performed,
for the first time, at his own obsequies. What other accents could have
been found capable of expressing, with the same heart-breaking effect,
the emotions, the tears, which should accompany to the last long sleep,
one who had taught in a manner so sublime, how great losses should
be mourned? We once heard it remarked by a native of his own country:
"these pages could only have been written by a Pole." All that the
funeral train of an entire nation weeping its own ruin and death can
be imagined to feel of desolating woe, of majestic sorrow, wails in
the musical ringing of this passing bell, mourns in the tolling of this
solemn knell, as it accompanies the mighty escort on its way to the
still city of the Dead. The intensity of mystic hope; the devout appeal
to superhuman pity, to infinite mercy, to a dread justice, which numbers
every cradle and watches every tomb; the exalted resignation which has
wreathed so much grief with halos so luminous; the noble endurance of so
many disasters with the inspired heroism of Christian martyrs who
know not to despair;--resound in this melancholy chant, whose voice of
supplication breaks the heart. All of most pure, of most holy, of
most believing, of most hopeful in the hearts of children, women,
and priests, resounds, quivers and trembles there with irresistible
vibrations. We feel it is not the death of a single warrior we mourn,
while other heroes live to avenge him, but that a whole generation of
warriors has forever fallen, leaving the death song to be chanted but by
wailing women, weeping children and helpless priests. Yet this
Melopee so funereal, so full of desolating woe, is of such penetrating
sweetness, that we can scarcely deem it of this earth. These sounds,
in which the wild passion of human anguish seems chilled by awe and
softened by distance, impose a profound meditation, as if, chanted
by angels, they floated already in the heavens: the cry of a nation's
anguish mounting to the very throne of God! The appeal of human grief
from the lyre of seraphs! Neither cries, nor hoarse groans, nor impious
blasphemies, nor furious imprecations, trouble for a moment the sublime
sorrow of the plaint: it breathes upon the ear like the rhythmed sighs
of angels. The antique face of grief is entirely excluded. Nothing
recalls the fury of Cassandra, the prostration of Priam, the frenzy of
Hecuba, the despair of the Trojan captives. A sublime faith destroying
in the survivors of this Christian Ilion the bitterness of anguish and
the cowardice of despair, their sorrow is no longer marked by earthly
weakness. Raising itself from the soil wet with blood and tears, it
springs forward to implore God; and, having nothing more to hope from
earth, it supplicates the Supreme Judge with prayers so poignant,
that our hearts, in listening, break under the weight of an august
compassion! It would be a mistake to suppose that all the compositions
of Chopin are deprived of the feelings which he has deemed best to
suppress in this great work. Not so. Perhaps human nature is not capable
of maintaining always this mood of energetic abnegation, of courageous
submission. We meet with breathings of stifled rage, of suppressed
anger, in many passages of his writings: and many of his Studies, as
well as his Scherzos, depict a concentrated exasperation and despair,
which are sometimes manifested in bitter irony, sometimes in intolerant
hauteur. These dark apostrophes of his muse have attracted less
attention, have been less fully understood, than his poems of more
tender coloring. The personal character of Chopin had something to
do with this general misconception. Kind, courteous, and affable, of
tranquil and almost joyous manners, he would not suffer the secret
convulsions which agitated him to be even suspected.

His character was indeed not easily understood. A thousand subtle
shades, mingling, crossing, contradicting and disguising each other,
rendered it almost undecipherable at a first view. As is usually the
case with the Sclaves, it was difficult to read the recesses of
his mind. With them, loyalty and candor, familiarity and the most
captivating ease of manner, by no means imply confidence, or impulsive
frankness. Like the twisted folds of a serpent rolled upon itself, their
feelings are half hidden, half revealed. It requires a most attentive
examination to follow the coiled linking of the glittering rings. It
would be naive to interpret literally their courtesy full of compliment,
their assumed humility. The forms of this politeness, this modesty, have
their solution in their manners, in which their ancient connection with
the East may be strangely traced. Without having in the least degree
acquired the taciturnity of the Mussulman, they have yet learned from
it a distrustful reserve upon all subjects which touch upon the
more delicate and personal chords of the heart. When they speak
of themselves, we may almost always be certain that they keep some
concealment in reserve, which assures them the advantage in intellect,
or feeling. They suffer their interrogator to remain in ignorance of
some circumstance, some mobile secret, through the unveiling of which
they would be more admired, or less esteemed, and which they well know
how to hide under the subtle smile of an almost imperceptible mockery.
Delighting in the pleasure of mystification, from the most spiritual or
comic to the most bitter and melancholy, they may perhaps find in
this deceptive raillery an external formula of disdain for the veiled
expression of the superiority which they internally claim, but
which claim they veil with the caution and astuteness natural to the
oppressed.

The frail and sickly organization of Chopin, not permitting him the
energetic expression of his passions, he gave to his friends only the
gentle and affectionate phase of his nature. In the busy, eager life
of large cities, where no one has time to study the destiny of another,
where every one is judged by his external activity, very few think it
worth while to attempt to penetrate the enigma of individual character.
Those who enjoyed familiar intercourse with Chopin, could not be blind
to the impatience and ennui he experienced in being, upon the calm
character of his manners, so promptly believed. And may not the artist
revenge the man? As his health was too frail to permit him to give vent
to his impatience through the vehemence of his execution, he sought to
compensate himself by pouring this bitterness over those pages which he
loved to hear performed with a vigor [Footnote: It was his delight to
hear them executed by the great Liszt himself.--Translator.] which he
could not himself always command: pages which are indeed full of the
impassioned feelings of a man suffering deeply from wounds which he does
not choose to avow. Thus around a gaily flagged, yet sinking ship, float
the fallen spars and scattered fragments, torn by warring winds and
surging waves from its shattered sides.

Such emotions have been of so much the more importance in the life
of Chopin, because they have deeply influenced the character of his
compositions. Among the pages published under such influences, may be
traced much analogous to the wire-drawn subtleties of Jean Paul, who
found it necessary, in order to move hearts macerated by passion, blazes
through suffering, to make use of the surprises caused by natural and
physical phenomena; to evoke the sensations of luxurious terrors arising
from occurrences not to be foreseen in the natural order of things;
to awaken the morbid excitements of a dreamy brain. Step by step the
tortured mind of Chopin arrived at a state of sickly irritability; his
emotions increased to a feverish tremor, producing that involution, that
tortuosity of thought, which mark his latest works. Almost suffocating
under the oppression of repressed feelings, using art only to repeat
and rehearse for himself his own internal tragedy, after having wearied
emotion, he began to subtilize it. His melodies are actually tormented;
a nervous and restless sensibility leads to an obstinate persistence
in the handling and rehandling and a reiterated pursuit of the tortured
motifs, which impress us as painfully as the sight of those physical or
mental agonies which we know can find relief only in death. Chopin was a
victim to a disease without hope, which growing more envenomed from year
to year, took him, while yet young, from those who loved him, and laid
him in his still grave. As in the fair form of some beautiful victim,
the marks of the grasping claws of the fierce bird of prey which has
destroyed it, may be found; so, in the productions of which we have just
spoken, the traces of the bitter sufferings which devoured his heart,
are painfully visible.



CHAPTER II.

National Character of the
Polonaise--Oginski--Meyseder--Weber--Chopin--His Polonaise in F Sharp,
Minor--Polonaise--Fantaisie.


It must not be supposed that the tortured aberrations of feeling to
which we have just alluded, ever injure the harmonic tissue in the works
of Chopin on the contrary, they only render it a more curious subject
for analysis. Such eccentricities rarely occur in his more generally
known and admired compositions. His Polonaises, which are less studied
than they merit, on account of the difficulties presented by their
perfect execution, are to be classed among his highest inspirations.
They never remind us of the mincing and affected "Polonaises a la
Pompadour," which our orchestras have introduced into ball-rooms,
our virtuosi in concerts, or of those to be found in our "Parlor
Repertories," filled, as they invariably are, with hackneyed collections
of music, marked by insipidity and mannerism.

His Polonaises, characterized by an energetic rhythm, galvanize and
electrify the torpor of indifference. The most noble traditional
feelings of ancient Poland are embodied in them. The firm resolve
and calm gravity of its men of other days, breathe through these
compositions. Generally of a martial character, courage and daring are
rendered with that simplicity of expression, said to be a distinctive
trait of this warlike people. They bring vividly before the imagination,
the ancient Poles, as we find them described in their chronicles; gifted
with powerful organizations, subtle intellects, indomitable courage and
earnest piety, mingled with high-born courtesy and a gallantry which
never deserted them, whether on the eve of battle, during its exciting
course, in the triumph of victory, or amidst the gloom of defeat. So
inherent was this gallantry and chivalric courtesy in their nature, that
in spite of the restraint which their customs (resembling those of
their neighbours and enemies, the infidels of Stamboul) induced them to
exercise upon their women, confining them in the limits of domestic
life and always holding them under legal wardship, they still
manifest themselves in their annals, in which they have glorified
and immortalized queens who were saints; vassals who became queens,
beautiful subjects for whose sake some periled, while others lost,
crowns: a terrible Sforza; an intriguing d'Arquien; and a coquettish
Gonzaga.

The Poles of olden times united a manly firmness with this peculiar
chivalric devotion to the objects of their love. A characteristic
example of this may be seen in the letters of Jean Sobieski to his wife.
They were dictated in face of the standards of the Crescent, "numerous
as the ears in a grain-field," tender and devoted as is their character.
Such traits caught a singular and imposing hue from the grave deportment
of these men, so dignified that they might almost be accused of
pomposity. It was next to impossible that they should not contract a
taste for this stateliness, when we consider that they had almost
always before them the most exquisite type of gravity of manner in the
followers of Islam, whose qualities they appreciated and appropriated,
even while engaged in repelling their invasions. Like the infidel, they
knew how to preface their acts by an intelligent deliberation, so that
the device of Prince Boleslas of Pomerania, was always present to them:
"First weigh it; then dare:" Erst wieg's: dann wag's! Such deliberation
imparted a kind of stately pride to their movements, while it left
them in possession of an ease and freedom of spirit accessible to the
lightest cares of tenderness, to the most trivial interests of the
passing hour, to the most transient feelings of the heart. As it made
part of their code of honor to make those who interfered with them,
in their more tender interests, pay dearly for it; so they knew how
to beautify life, and, better still, they knew how to love those who
embellished it; to revere those who rendered it precious to them.

Their chivalric heroism was sanctioned by their grave and haughty
dignity; an intelligent and premeditated conviction added the force of
reason to the energy of impulsive virtue; thus they have succeeded in
winning the admiration of all ages, of all minds, even that of their
most determined adversaries. They were characterized by qualities
rarely found together, the description of which would appear almost
paradoxical: reckless wisdom, daring prudence, and fanatic fatalism. The
most marked and celebrated historic manifestation of these properties is
to be found in the expedition of Sobieski when he saved Vienna, and gave
a mortal blow to the Ottoman Empire, which was at last conquered in the
long struggle, sustained on both sides with so much prowess and glory,
with so much mutual deference between opponents as magnanimous in their
truces as irreconcilable in their combats.

While listening to some of the POLONAISES of Chopin, we can almost catch
the firm, nay, the more than firm, the heavy, resolute tread of men
bravely facing all the bitter injustice which the most cruel and
relentless destiny can offer, with the manly pride of unblenching
courage. The progress of the music suggests to our imagination such
magnificent groups as were designed by Paul Veronese, robed in the
rich costume of days long past: we see passing at intervals before us,
brocades of gold, velvets, damasked satins, silvery soft and flexile
sables, hanging sleeves gracefully thrown back upon the shoulders,
embossed sabres, boots yellow as gold or red with trampled blood, sashes
with long and undulating fringes, close chemisettes, rustling trains,
stomachers embroidered with pearls, head dresses glittering with rubies
or leafy with emeralds, light slippers rich with amber, gloves perfumed
with the luxurious attar from the harems. Prom the faded background of
times long passed these vivid groups start forth; gorgeous carpets from
Persia lie at their feet, filigreed furniture from Constantinople stands
around; all is marked by the sumptuous prodigality of the Magnates who
drew, in ruby goblets embossed with medallions, wine from the fountains
of Tokay, and shoed their fleet Arabian steeds with silver, who
surmounted all their escutcheons with the same crown which the fate of
an election might render a royal one, and which, causing them to despise
all other titles, was alone worn as INSIGNE of their glorious equality.

Those who have seen the Polonaise danced even as late as the beginning
of the present century, declare that its style has changed so much, that
it is now almost impossible to divine its primitive character. As very
few national dances have succeeded in preserving their racy originality,
we may imagine, when we take into consideration the changes which
have occurred, to what a degree this has degenerated. The Polonaise is
without rapid movements, without any true steps in the artistic sense
of the word, intended rather for display than for the exhibition of
seductive grace; so we may readily conceive it must lose all its haughty
importance, its pompous self-sufficiency, when the dancers are deprived
of the accessories necessary to enable them to animate its simple
form by dignified, yet vivid gestures, by appropriate and expressive
pantomime, and when the costume peculiarly fitted for it is no longer
worn. It has indeed become decidedly monotonous, a mere circulating
promenade, exciting but little interest. Unless we could see it danced
by some of the old regime who still wear the ancient costume, or listen
to their animated descriptions of it, we can form no conception of the
numerous incidents, the scenic pantomime, which once rendered it so
effective. By a rare exception this dance was designed to exhibit the
men, to display manly beauty, to set off noble and dignified deportment,
martial yet courtly bearing. "Martial yet courtly:" do not these two
epithets almost define the Polish character? In the original the
very name of the dance is masculine; it is only in consequence of a
misconception that it has been translated in other tongues into the
feminine gender.

Those who have never seen the KONTUSZ worn, (it is a kind of Occidental
kaftan, as it is the robe of the Orientals, modified to suit the customs
of an active life, unfettered by the stagnant resignation taught by
fatalism,) a sort of FEREDGI, often trimmed with fur, forcing the wearer
to make frequent movements susceptible of grace and coquetry, by which
the flowing sleeves are thrown backward, can scarcely imagine the
bearing, the slow bending, the quick rising, the finesse of the delicate
pantomime displayed by the Ancients, as they defiled in a Polonaise, as
though in a military parade, not suffering their fingers to remain
idle, but sometimes occupying them in playing with the long moustache,
sometimes with the handle of the sword. Both moustache and sword were
essential parts of the costume, and were indeed objects of vanity with
all ages. Diamonds and sapphires frequently sparkled upon the arms, worn
suspended from belts of cashmere, or from sashes of silk embroidered
with gold, displaying to advantage forms always slightly corpulent;
the moustache often veiled, without quite hiding, some scar, far more
effective than the most brilliant array of jewels. The dress of the men
rivaled that of the women in the luxury of the material worn, in the
value of the precious stones, and in the variety of vivid colors. This
love of adornment is also found among the Hungarians, [Footnote: The
Hungarian costume worn by Prince Nicholas Esterhazy at the coronation
of George the Fourth, is still remembered in England. It was valued at
several millions of florins.] as may be seen in their buttons made of
jewels, the rings forming a necessary part of their dress, the wrought
clasps for the neck, the aigrettes and plumes adorning the cap made of
velvet of some brilliant hue. To know how to take off, to put on, to
manoeuvre the cap with all possible grace, constituted almost an art.
During the progress of a Polonaise, this became an object of especial
remark, because the cavalier of the leading pair, as commandant of the
file, gave the mute word of command, which was immediately obeyed and
imitated by the rest of the train.

The master of the house in which the ball was given, always opened it
himself by leading off in this dance. His partner was selected neither
for her beauty, nor youth; the most highly honored lady present
was always chosen. This phalanx, by whose evolutions every fete was
commenced, was not formed only of the young: it was composed of the
most distinguished, as well as of the most beautiful. A grand review, a
dazzling exhibition of all the distinction present, was offered as the
highest pleasure of the festival. After the host, came next in order the
guests of the greatest consideration, who, choosing their partners, some
from friendship, some from policy or from desire of advancement,
some from love,--followed closely his steps. His task was a far more
complicated one than it is at present. He was expected to conduct the
files under his guidance through a thousand capricious meanderings,
through long suites of apartments lined by guests, who were to take a
later part in this brilliant cortege. They liked to be conducted through
distant galleries, through the parterres of illuminated gardens, through
the groves of shrubbery, where distant echoes of the music alone reached
the ear, which, as if in revenge, greeted them with redoubled sound and
blowing of trumpets upon their return to the principal saloon. As the
spectators, ranged like rows of hedges along the route, were continually
changing, and never ceased for a moment to observe all their movements,
the dancers never forgot that dignity of bearing and address which won
for them the admiration of women, and excited the jealousy of men. Vain
and joyous, the host would have deemed himself wanting in courtesy to
his guests, had he not evinced to them, which he did sometimes with
a piquant naivete, the pride he felt in seeing himself surrounded by
persons so illustrious, and partisans so noble, all striving through the
splendor of the attire chosen to visit him, to show their high sense of
the honor in which they held him.

Guided by him in their first circuit, they were led through long
windings, where unexpected turns, views, and openings had been
arranged beforehand to cause surprise; where architectural deceptions,
decorations and shifting scenes had been studiously adapted to increase
the pleasure of the festival. If any monument or inscription, fitted
for the occasion, lay upon the long line of route, from which some
complimentary homage might be drawn to the "most valiant or the most
beautiful," the honors were gracefully done by the host. The more
unexpected the surprises arranged for these excursions, the more
imagination evinced in their invention, the louder were the applauses
from the younger part of the society, the more ardent the exclamations
of delight; and silvery sounds of merry laughter greeted pleasantly the
ears of the conductor-in-chief, who, having thus succeeded in achieving
his reputation, became a privileged Corypheus, a leader par excellence.
If he had already attained a certain age, he was greeted on his return
from such circuits by frequent deputations of young ladies, who came,
in the name of all present, to thank and congratulate him. Through their
vivid descriptions, these pretty wanderers excited the curiosity of the
guests, and increased the eagerness for the formation of the succeeding
Polonaises among those who, though they did not make part of the
procession, still watched its passage in motionless attention, as if
gazing upon the flashing line of light of some brilliant meteor.

In this land of aristocratic democracy, the numerous dependents of the
great seigniorial houses, (too poor, indeed, to take part in the fete,
yet only excluded from it by their own volition, all, however noble,
some even more noble than their lords,) being all present, it was
considered highly desirable to dazzle them; and this flowing chain
of rainbow-hued and gorgeous light, like an immense serpent with
its glittering rings, sometimes wreathed its linked folds, sometimes
uncoiled its entire length, to display its brilliancy through the
whole line of its undulating animated surface, in the most vivid
scintillations; accompanying the shifting hues with the silvery sounds
of chains of gold, ringing like muffled bells; with the rustling of the
heavy sweep of gorgeous damasks and with the dragging of jewelled
swords upon the floor. The murmuring sound of many voices announced the
approach of this animated, varied, and glittering life-stream.

But the genius of hospitality, never deficient in high-born courtesy,
and which, even while preserving the touching simplicity of primitive
manners, inspired in Poland all the refinements of the most advanced
state of civilization,--how could it be exiled from the details of a
dance so eminently Polish? After the host had, by inaugurating the fete,
rendered due homage to all who were present, any one of his guests had
the right to claim his place with the lady whom he had honored by his
choice. The new claimant, clapping his hands, to arrest for a moment the
ever moving cortege, bowed before the partner of the host, begging her
graciously to accept the change; while the host, from whom she had been
taken, made the same appeal to the lady next in course. This example was
followed by the whole train. Constantly changing partners, whenever a
new cavalier claimed the honor of leading the one first chosen by
the host, the ladies remained in the same succession during the whole
course; while, on the contrary, as the gentlemen continually replaced
each other, he who had commenced the dance, would, in its progress,
become the last, if not indeed entirely excluded before its close.

Each cavalier who placed himself in turn at the head of the column,
tried to surpass his predecessors in the novelty of the combinations of
his opening, in the complications of the windings through which he led
the expectant cortege; and this course, even when restricted to a
single saloon, might be made remarkable by the designing of graceful
arabesques, or the involved tracing of enigmatical ciphers. He made good
his claim to the place he had solicited, and displayed his skill, by
inventing close, complicated and inextricable figures; by describing
them with so much certainty and accuracy, that the living ribbon, turned
and twisted as it might be, was never broken in the loosing of its
wreathed knots; and by so leading, that no confusion or graceless
jostling should result from the complicated torsion. The succeeding
couples, who had only to follow the figures already given, and thus
continue the impulsion, were not permitted to drag themselves lazily
and listlessly along the parquet. The step was rhythmic, cadenced, and
undulating; the whole form swayed by graceful wavings and harmonious
balancings. They were careful never to advance with too much haste, nor
to replace each other as if driven on by some urgent necessity. On they
glided, like swans descending a tranquil stream, their flexile forms
swayed by the ebb and swell of unseen and gentle waves. Sometimes, the
gentleman offered the right, sometimes, the left hand to his partner;
touching only the points of her fingers, or clasping the slight hand
within his own, he passed now to her right, now to her left, without
yielding the snowy treasure. These complicated movements, being
instantaneously imitated by every pair, ran, like an electric shiver,
through the whole length of this gigantic serpent. Although apparently
occupied and absorbed by these multiplied manoeuvres, the cavalier yet
found time to bend to his lady and whisper sweet flatteries in her ear,
if she were young; if young no longer, to repose confidence, to urge
requests, or to repeat to her the news of the hour. Then, haughtily
raising himself, he would make the metal of his arms ring, caress his
thick moustache, giving to all his features an expression so vivid, that
the lady was forced to respond by the animation of her own countenance.

Thus, it was no hackneyed and senseless promenade which they executed;
it was, rather, a parade in which the whole splendor of the society
was exhibited, gratified with its own admiration, conscious of its own
elegance, brilliancy, nobility and courtesy. It was a constant display
of its lustre, its glory, its renown. Men grown gray in camps, or in
the strife of courtly eloquence; generals more often seen in the cuirass
than in the robes of peace; prelates and persons high in the Church;
dignitaries of State aged senators; warlike palatines; ambitious
castellans;--were the partners who were expected, welcomed, disputed and
sought for, by the youngest, gayest, and most brilliant women present.
Honor and glory rendered ages equal, and caused years to be forgotten
in this dance; nay, more, they gave an advantage even over love. It was
while listening to the animated descriptions of the almost forgotten
evolutions and dignified capabilities of this truly national dance, from
the lips of those who would never abandon the ancient Zupan and Kontusz,
and who still wore their hair closely cut round their temples, as it had
been worn by their ancestors, that we first fully understood in what a
high degree this haughty nation possessed the innate instinct of its own
exhibition, and how entirely it had succeeded, through its natural grace
and genius, in poetizing its love of ostentation by draping it in the
charms of noble emotions, and wrapping round it the glittering robes of
martial glory.

When we visited the country of Chopin, whose memory always accompanied
us like a faithful guide who constantly keeps our interest excited,
we were fortunate enough to meet with some of the peculiar characters,
daily growing more rare, because European civilization, even where it
does not modify the basis of character, effaces asperities, and moulds
exterior forms. We there encountered some of those men gifted with
superior intellect, cultivated and strongly developed by a life of
incessant action, yet whose horizon does not extend beyond the limits of
their own country, their own society, their own traditions. During our
intercourse, facilitated by an interpreter, with these men of past
days, we were able to study them and to understand the secret of their
greatness. It was really curious to observe the inimitable originality
caused by the utter exclusiveness of the view taken by them. This
limited cultivation, while it greatly diminishes the value of their
ideas upon many subjects, at the same time gifts the mind with
a peculiar force, almost resembling the keen scent and the acute
perceptions of the savage, for all the things near and dear to it. Only
from a mind of this peculiar training, marked by a concentrative energy
that nothing can distract from its course, every thing beyond the circle
of its own nationality remaining alien to it, can we hope to obtain
an exact picture of the past; for it alone, like a faithful mirror,
reflects it in its primal coloring, preserves its proper lights and
shades, and gives it with its varied and picturesque accompaniments.
From such minds alone can we obtain, with the ritual of customs which
are rapidly becoming extinct, the spirit from which they emanated.
Chopin was born too late, and left the domestic hearth too early, to be
himself in possession of this spirit; but he had known many examples of
it, and, through the memories which surrounded his childhood, even more
fully than through the literature and history of his country, he found
by induction the secrets of its ancient prestige, which he evoked from
the dim and dark land of forgetfulness, and, through the magic of his
poetic art, endowed with immortal youth. Poets are better comprehended
and appreciated by those who have made themselves familiar with the
countries which inspired their songs. Pindar is more fully understood by
those who have seen the Parthenon bathed in the radiance of its limpid
atmosphere; Ossian, by those familiar with the mountains of Scotland,
with their heavy veils and long wreaths of mist. The feelings which
inspired the creations of Chopin can only be fully appreciated by those
who have visited his country. They must have seen the giant shadows
of past centuries gradually increasing, and veiling the ground as the
gloomy night of despair rolled on; they must have felt the electric and
mystic influence of that strange "phantom of glory" forever haunting
martyred Poland. Even in the gayest hours of festival, it appalls and
saddens all hearts. Whenever a tale of past renown, a commemoration of
slaughtered heroes is given, an allusion to national prowess is made,
its resurrection from the grave is instantaneous; it takes its place
in the banquet-hall, spreading an electric terror mingled with intense
admiration; a shudder, wild and mystic as that which seizes upon the
peasants of Ukraine, when the "Beautiful Virgin," white as Death, with
her girdle of crimson, is suddenly seen gliding through their tranquil
village, while her shadowy hand marks with blood the door of each
cottage doomed to destruction.

During many centuries, the civilization of Poland was entirely peculiar
and aboriginal; it did not resemble that of any other country; and,
indeed, it seems destined to remain forever unique in its kind. As
different from the German feudalism which neighboured it upon the West,
as from the conquering spirit of the Turks which disquieted it on
the East, it resembled Europe in its chivalric Christianity, in its
eagerness to attack the infidel, even while receiving instruction in
sagacious policy, in military tactics, and sententious reasoning, from
the masters of Byzantium. By the assumption, at the same time, of the
heroic qualities of Mussulman fanaticism and the sublime virtues of
Christian sanctity and humility, [Footnote: It is well known with how
many glorious names Poland has enriched the martyrology of the Church.
In memorial of the countless martyrs it had offered, the Roman Church
granted to the order of Trinitarians, or Redemptorist Brothers, whose
duty it was to redeem from slavery the Christians who had fallen into
the hands of the Infidels, the distinction, only granted to this nation,
of wearing a crimson belt. These victims to benevolence were
generally from the establishments near the frontiers, such as those of
Kamieniec-Podolski.] it mingled the most heterogeneous elements, and
thus planted in its very bosom the seeds of ruin and decay.

The general culture of Latin letters, the knowledge of and love for
Italian and French literature gave a lustre and classical polish to the
startling contrasts we hare attempted to describe. Such a civilization
must necessarily impress all its manifestations with its own seal. As
was natural for a nation always engaged in war, forced to reserve its
deeds of prowess and valor for its enemies upon the field of battle, it
was not famed for the romances of knight-errantry, for tournaments or
jousts; it replaced the excitement and splendor of the mimic war by
characteristic fetes, in which the gorgeousness of personal display
formed the principal feature.

There is certainly nothing new in the assertion, that national character
is, in some degree, revealed by national dances. We believe, however,
there are none in which the creative impulses can be so readily
deciphered, or the ensemble traced with so much simplicity, as in the
Polonaise. In consequence of the varied episodes which each individual
was expected to insert in the general frame, the national intuitions
were revealed with the greatest diversity. When these distinctive marks
disappeared, when the original flame no longer burned, when no one
invented scenes for the intermediary pauses, when to accomplish
mechanically the obligatory circuit of a saloon, was all that was
requisite, nothing but the skeleton of departed glory remained.

We would certainly have hesitated to speak of the Polonaise, after
the exquisite verses which Mickiewicz has consecrated to it, and the
admirable description which he has given of it in the last Canto of the
"Pan Tadeusz," but that this description is to be found only in a work
not yet translated, and, consequently, only known to the compatriots of
the Poet. [Footnote: It has been translated into German.--T.] It would
have been presumptuous, even under another form, to have ventured upon
a subject already sketched and colored by such a hand, in his romantic
Epic, in which beauties of the highest order are set in such a scene as
Ruysdael loved to paint; where a ray of sunshine, thrown through heavy
storm-clouds, falls upon one of those strange trees never wanting in his
pictures, a birch shattered by lightning, while its snowy bark is deeply
stained, as if dyed in the blood flowing from its fresh and gaping
wounds. The scenes of "Pan Tadeusz" are laid at the beginning of the
present century, when many still lived who retained the profound feeling
and grave deportment of the ancient Poles, mingled with those who were
even then under the sway of the graceful or giddying passions of modern
origin. These striking and contrasting types existing together at
that period, are now rapidly disappearing before that universal
conventionalism which is at present seizing and moulding the higher
classes in all cities and in all countries. Without doubt, Chopin
frequently drew fresh inspiration from this noble poem, whose scenes so
forcibly depict the emotions he best loved to reproduce.

The primitive music of the Polonaise, of which we have no example of
greater age than a century, possesses but little value for art. Those
Polonaises which do not bear the names of their authors, but are
frequently marked with the name of some hero, thus indicating
their date, are generally grave and sweet. The Polonaise styled "de
Kosciuszko," is the most universally known, and is so closely linked
with the memories of his epoch, that we have known ladies who could not
hear it without breaking into sobs. The Princess F. L., who had been
loved by Kosciuszko, in her last days, when age had enfeebled all her
faculties, was only sensible to the chords of this piece, which her
trembling hands could still find upon the key-board, though the dim and
aged eye could no longer see the keys. Some contemporary Polonaises are
of a character so sad, that they might almost be supposed to accompany a
funeral train.

The Polonaises of Count Oginski [Footnote: Among the Polonaises of Count
Oginski, the one in F Major has especially retained its celebrity. It
was published with a vignette, representing the author in the act
of blowing his brains out with a pistol. This was merely a romantic
commentary, which was for a long time mistaken for a fact.] which next
appeared, soon attained great popularity through the introduction of an
air of seductive languor into the melancholy strains. Full of gloom
as they still are, they soothe by their delicious tenderness, by their
naive and mournful grace. The martial rhythm grows more feeble; the
march of the stately train, no longer rustling in its pride of state, is
hushed in reverential silence, in solemn thought, as if its course wound
on through graves, whose sad swells extinguish smiles and humiliate
pride. Love alone survives, as the mourners wander among the mounds
of earth so freshly heaped that the grass has not yet grown upon them,
repeating the sad refrain which the Bard of Erin caught from the wild
breezes of the sea:

"Love born of sorrow, like sorrow is true!"

In the well known pages of Oginski may be found the sighing of analogous
thoughts: the very breath of love is sad, and only revealed through the
melancholy lustre of eyes bathed in tears.

At a somewhat later stage, the graves and grassy mounds were all passed,
they are seen only in the distance of the shadowy background. The living
cannot always weep; life and animation again appear, mournful thoughts
changed into soothing memories, return on the ear, sweet as distant
echoes. The saddened train of the living no longer hush their breath as
they glide on with noiseless precaution, as if not to disturb the sleep
of those who have just departed, over whose graves the turf is not yet
green; the imagination no longer evokes only the gloomy shadows of
the past. In the Polonaises of Lipinski we hear the music of the
pleasure-loving heart once more beating joyously, giddily, happily, as
it had done before the days of disaster and defeat. The melodies breathe
more and more the perfume of happy youth; love, young love, sighs
around. Expanding into expressive songs of vague and dreamy character,
they speak but to youthful hearts, cradling them in poetic fictions, in
soft illusions. No longer destined to cadence the steps of the high
and grave personages who ceased to bear their part in these dances,
[Footnote: Bishops and Primates formerly assisted in these dances; at
a later date the Church dignitaries took no part in them.] they are
addressed to romantic imaginations, dreaming rather of rapture than of
renown. Meyseder advanced upon this descending path; his dances, full of
lively coquetry, reflect only the magic charms of youth and beauty.
His numerous imitations have inundated us with pieces of music, called
Polonaises, out which have no characteristics to justify the name.

The pristine and vigorous brilliancy of the Polonaise was again
suddenly given to it by a composer of true genius. Weber made of it a
Dithyrambic, in which the glittering display of vanished magnificence
again appeared in its ancient glory. He united all the resources of his
art to ennoble the formula which had been so misrepresented and debased,
to fill it with the spirit of the past; not seeking to recall
the character of ancient music, he transported into music the
characteristics of ancient Poland. Using the melody as a recital,
he accentuated the rhythm, he colored his composition, through his
modulations, with a profusion of hues not only suitable to his subject,
but imperiously demanded by it. Life, warmth, and passion again
circulated in his Polonaises, yet he did not deprive them of the
haughty charm, the ceremonious and magisterial dignity, the natural yet
elaborate majesty, which are essential parts of their character. The
cadences are marked by chords, which fall upon the ear like the rattling
of swords drawn from their scabbards. The soft, warm, effeminate
pleadings of love give place to the murmuring of deep, fall, bass
voices, proceeding from manly breasts used to command; we may almost
hear, in reply, the wild and distant neighings of the steeds of
the desert, as they toss the long manes around their haughty heads,
impatiently pawing the ground, with their lustrous eye beaming with
intelligence and full of fire, while they bear with stately grace the
trailing caparisons embroidered with turquoise and rubies, with which
the Polish Seigneurs loved to adorn them. [Footnote: Among the treasures
of Prince radziwill at Nieswirz were to be seen, in the days of former
splendor, twelve sets of horse trappings, each of a different color,
incrusted with precious stones. The twelve Apostles, life size, in
massive silver, were also to be seen there. This luxury will cease to
astonish us when we consider that the family of Radziwill was descended
from the last Grand Pontiff of Lithuania, to whom, when he embraced
Christianity, were given all the forests and plains which had before
been consecrated to the worship of the heathen Deities; and that toward
the close of the last century, the family still possessed eight hundred
thousand serfs, although its riches had then considerably diminished.
Among the collection of treasures of which we speak, was an exceedingly
curious relic, which is still in existence. It is a picture of St. John
the Baptist, surrounded by a Bannerol bearing the inscription: "In the
name of the Lord, John, thou shalt be Conqueror." It was found by Jean
Sobieski himself, after the victory which he had won, under the walls of
Vienna, in the tent of the Vizier Kara Mustapha. It was presented after
his death, by Marie d'Arquin, to a Prince Radziwill, with an inscription
in her own hand-writing which indicates its origin, and the presentation
which she makes of it. The autograph, with the royal seal, is on the
reverse side of the canvas.] How did Weber divine the Poland of other
days? Had he indeed the power to call from the grave of the past, the
scenes which we have just contemplated, that he was thus able to clothe
them with life, to renew their earlier associations? Vain questions!
Genius is always endowed with its own sacred intuitions! Poetry ever
reveals to her chosen the secrets of her wild domain!

All the poetry contained in the Polonaises had, like a rich sap, been so
fully expressed from them by the genius of Weber, they had been handled
with a mastery so absolute, that it was, indeed, a dangerous and
difficult thing to attempt them, with the slightest hope of producing
the same effect. He has, however, been surpassed in this species of
composition by Chopin, not only in the number and variety of works in
this style, but also in the more touching character of the handling,
and the new and varied processes of harmony. Both in construction and
spirit, Chopin's Polonaise In A, with the one in A flat major, resembles
very much the one of Weber's in E Major. In others he relinquished this
broad style: Shall we say always with a more decided success? In such a
question, decision were a thorny thing. Who shall restrict the rights of
a poet over the various phases of his subject? Even in the midst of joy,
may he not be permitted to be gloomy and oppressed? After having chanted
the splendor of glory, may he not sing of grief? After having rejoiced
with the victorious, may he not mourn with the vanquished? We may,
without any fear of contradiction, assert, that it is not one of the
least merits of Chopin, that he has, consecutively, embraced ALL the
phases of which the theme is susceptible, that he has succeeded in
eliciting from it all its brilliancy, in awakening from it all its
sadness. The variety of the moods of feeling to which he was himself
subject, aided him in the reproduction and comprehension of such a
multiplicity of views. It would be impossible to follow the varied
transformations occurring in these compositions, with their pervading
melancholy, without admiring the fecundity of his creative force, even
when not fully sustained by the higher powers of his inspiration. He
did not always confine himself to the consideration of the pictures
presented to him by his imagination and memory, taken en masse, or as a
united whole. More than once, while contemplating the brilliant groups
and throngs flowing on before him, has he yielded to the strange charm
of some isolated figure, arresting it in its course by the magic of his
gaze, and, suffering the gay crowds to pass on, he has given himself
up with delight to the divination of its mystic revelations, while he
continued to weave his incantations and spells only for the entranced
Sibyl of his song.
