HISTORY OF FLIGHT
Ever since 1878, when their father brought home a toy helicopter powered by a rubber band, Will and his brother Orville wanted to fly. Although flying machines (follow this link to a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci from 1488) had been designed and invented before Will Wright's "affliction," the only humans who had ever flown a controlled flight were characters from Greek mythology. Remember the story? Daedalus, a famous Greek inventor and craftsman from Athens, was summoned by King Minos (of Crete). At the king's request, the architect created a maze to prevent a monster bull, called the Minotaur, from escaping. When Minos grew angry with his inventor, he threw both Daedalus and his son, Icarus, into the labyrinth. Since he had created the maze, Daedalus knew how to get out of it. But how would he leave the island? He fashioned wings, made of bees' wax and bird feathers, to help him and Icarus fly away. Icarus did not heed his father's warning: "Don't fly too close to the sun." When his wing wax melted, Icarus fell to his death while his father flew safely to Sicily. Before Wilbur and Orville Wright, no one but mythical characters flew. Flying machines which had been invented didn't work properly because they could not be controlled in flight. Even the Wright brothers had a seven-year struggle. (This link takes you to a crash of their 1900 glider.) Things we take for granted today - how to use lift, thrust, weight and drag to fly - were not common knowledge before the Wright brothers. After the Wright brothers, the world changed. Darrel Collins, from Kitty Hawk National Historical Park, said it best: Before the Wright Brothers, no one in aviation did anything fundamentally right. Since the Wright Brothers, no one has done anything fundamentally different.  Wilbur and Orville owned a bike shop in Dayton, Ohio. It was the very things they knew and did as bike shop owners that helped them figure out what no one before them had fully understood. 
AIRCRAFT CONTROL
While helping a bike shop customer in 1899, Will Wright discovered an important new principle: how to give a flying machine the ability to execute a balanced, coordinated turn.From watching birds fly, the Wright brothers knew a bird rolls right or left when it changes the angle where the wind meets its wings. The change in angle causes one wing to tilt up while the other wing simultaneously tilts down. No one before the Wrights had ever figured out how to translate what a bird can do naturally into what a plane could do mechanically. Puzzled how to make a piece of machinery do what he knew it had to do, Will was fiddling with the packaging box of an inner tube he had just sold to his customer. When he squeezed opposite diagonal corners of the box, it twisted. It occurred to Will that the top and bottom of the box were just like the wings of a biplane. If he used cables to draw the spars and struts of a biplane's wings together, he could do to flying machines what he had done to the box. And - if it worked as he imagined - he would warp the wings so one side tilted down while the other side tilted up. The side that was tilted down would give the biplane more lift, thereby enabling him to roll it right or left - imitating birds in flight. Wilbur had come upon the first of many Wright discoveries. "Wing warping" (or, the aileron principle of flight) gave the Wright brothers a way to properly control one significant aspect of a biplane's movement. Armed with their discovery, the brothers made gliders. In 1901 they took one to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. They figured the wind along the seashore would help them get more lift as they launched their glider, while the sand would provide a soft-landing if they crashed. During their trials, they flew their gliders more than 700 times. While their glider was impressive, as were their flights, they still had to solve the main problem. How would they create and control a heavier-than-air, engine-powered machine that could take off, fly and land safely? Just being able to tilt the wings so the plane could properly roll was not enough. The glider flights had not produced the kind of lift the brothers expected. Wilbur was discouraged. He told Orville man would not fly for another thousand years. He was off by 999.
LIFT AND DRAG
For the next two years, Will and Orville used their bike shop as an invention center. Using a bike as their first testing device, they performed airfoil experiments. Pedaling their contraption as fast as they could was exhausting, so the brothers invented a wind tunnel into which they placed two homemade devices - one to test lift and the other to test drag. The blower fan, which was driven by an overhead belt, created winds up to 35 miles per hour. Writing down all their observations on strips of wallpaper, they ultimately compiled their findings into a notebook. Among other important conclusions, the brothers determined the commonly accepted coefficient of lift was too high. They also found a wing produced more lift if it had the shape of a parabola. Using the data from all their experiments, the brothers built a reworked glider in 1902. It was the first aircraft that solved the fundamental problems of flight: lift and three-axis control (referred to as pitch, roll, and yaw).
KITTY HAWK
Once the brothers were able to achieve sustained and controlled flight, based on their calculations and field tests, they constructed a larger version of their 1902 glider. They called it the Flyer. Most folks today know it as Flyer 1 or the Kitty Hawk. But Flyer 1 would be an airplane, not a glider. Will and Orville needed to figure out how to use a propeller in the air. Although they looked at shipbuilding literature, it didn't help them. There was no theory of propulsion. At the time, no one truly understood a propeller is nothing more than a wing rotating on its axis which lifts the plane forward. Once the Wright brothers reasoned through this fundamental tenet of self-propelled flight, they were ready to build their power source. It was a 4-cylinder, 12 horsepower gas engine they built with the help of their mechanic, Charlie Taylor. (Be sure to follow the links in this paragraph to view NASA-created animations depicting how Flyer's engine actually worked.) The Wright brothers had been in a race to see who could develop the first heavier-than-air powered flying machine. Samuel Langley, the distinguished secretary of the Smithsonian Institute, had developed an Aerodrome. When it crashed on launch, Langley left future experiments to the Wright brothers. Langley wasn't the only competition the brothers faced, however. They had to press forward. It was time for another trip to Kitty Hawk and Kill Devil Hill.
THE FIRST FLIGHT
On December 17, 1903 these normally cautious, deliberative, methodical, bicycle-shop-owning brothers did something surprising. They disregarded every aspect of safety to become the world's first powered flyers. The wind was strong that morning - gusting between 20 and 30 miles per hour. The Wright brothers had lots of reasons to delay their flight. The wind chill over the ocean would be about 4 degrees Fahrenheit - pretty cold for someone flying unprotected on Flyer 1. Just three days before Wilbur, winning a coin toss to see who would fly first, had taken the controls of Flyer 1 only to make a misjudgment at launch. Will's telegraph describing the misadventure, recorded by his father on December 15, says it all. But even though weather conditions were extremely unfavorable on the 17th, the brothers wanted to be home for Christmas. In an uncharacteristic action that has amazed historians ever since, the Wrights put safety second and passion first. It was time to fly their new airplane. John Daniels, a member of the Wright's crew, recalled those tense moments:
After a while they shook hands, and we couldn't help notice how they held on to each other's hand, sort o'like they hated to let go; like two folks parting who weren't sure they'd ever see each other again. At about 10:30 a.m. Orville, who had lost the coin toss to Wilbur on the 14th, took the controls. The wind was gusting at about 27 miles per hour. Launching from a homemade track apparatus the brothers called their "Grand Junction Railroad," Orville flew 120 feet in twelve seconds. Since no one had ever flown before, the Wright brothers knew they were taking a chance. They had their life-saving crew standing by. The crew witnessed the first time a human being ever flew a plane, under his control, from the ground, through the air, and back safely. But the short flight was jerky and unsteady. Orville, like his brother three days before, didn't have a good handle on the controls. Inventing a plane was one thing; actually flying it in real time was something else. They wanted to test Flyer 1 again. Wilbur flew next. His flight took him 175 feet. Orville was pilot-in-command of the 200-feet third flight. The last flight - ever - of Flyer 1 was amazing. Wilbur had a good feel of the controls. He flew fifty-seven seconds and covered 852 feet before he landed, breaking the rudder frame, after he lost control in a wind gust. Hand-carrying Flyer 1 back to the launching point, the brothers nearly lost the plane and one of their helpers, John Daniels (who had photographed the first flight). With the wind continuing to blow, the men put the plane down so they could rest. A sudden wind gust picked up one wing and, with Daniels caught in the bracing wires as he tried to protect the plane, it rolled again and again. Daniels escaped without injury, but Flyer 1 looked like a heap of kindling wood and torn cloth. It was later put back together and donated to the Smithsonian Institute where it is today - in the National Air and Space Museum.
Later that afternoon, Orville sent a telegram to his father who was home in Dayton. Elated, Mr. Wright wrote his personal thoughts in his diary, including his consternation that the press had not reported the amazing events. Orville also penned his reactions to the day's events in his diary. The test flights proved Orville and Wilbur Wright had conquered the initial problems of flight. They had filed an application for their new invention with the U.S. Patent Office nearly nine months before. But they had more work to do before they could make a practical airplane. Flyer 1 was underpowered and hard to control. It would only fly in a straight line for about a minute. For the next two years the brothers improved their designs. They set up the world's first test flight facilities at Huffman Prairie, today the site of Wright Patterson Air Force Base. By the end of 1905, with Flyer 3 still including parts that looked as though they belonged on a bicycle, they were flying figure-eights over Huffman Prairie until their fuel ran out. They had solved the practical problems of flight. By 1909, the Wright brothers had developed their first military flyer. Wilbur went to Europe and showed Europeans how to fly. (Follow this link to a movie of that event.) The Wright brothers' place as two of history's greatest inventors was assured. Like Gutenberg before them, Wilbur and Orville Wright forever changed life, as human beings had known it. No longer did people live in a two-dimensional world. No longer did men fight battles only on land and on sea.
THE FIRST ROCKETS
After Wilbur and Orville Wright's amazing breakthroughs, aviation technology - including the development of rockets, passenger planes, and supersonic experimental planes - moved quickly forward. In 1919 Robert Goddard, an American rocket pioneer, imagined a rocket that could reach the moon. Goddard's dream was realized exactly fifty years later when an American spacecraft, sent into orbit by a huge rocket, reached the moon. But the half-century between Goddard's belief and Neil Armstrong's first steps on the moon was filled with many disappointments and failures, not just huge accomplishments. One of Goddard's most important achievements was his belief that rockets had to be fueled with liquid, not solid (like gunpowder) fuel. After working on the concept for seventeen years, Goddard launched the first liquid fuel rocket on March 16, 1926. Although primitive (the rocket was at the top where it received fuel from two lines connected to the fuel tank at the bottom), it was a stunning conceptual achievement as important to space travel as the Wright brothers' work was to aviation. The rocket traveled 152 feet - about thirty-two feet more than Orville Wright's first powered flight in 1903. It was also Dr. Goddard who first envisioned that rockets require several stages. He received a patent, in 1914, for the concept that is an indispensable part of space travel today. The list of firsts created by this modest man is awe-inspiring. Some of his 214 patents still produce royalties for his estate. But Goddard's work was not embraced in his own country. Ridiculed by the American press for thinking - and writing - that a rocket could go through the vacuum of space, his published work was read and admired the year after his death (in 1945) by Wernher von Braun. Goddard, the pioneer, had in fact anticipated the awesome power of von Braun's German A4 rocket (known to a stunned world as the mighty V-2). When von Braun's team launched the V-2 on October 3, 1942, it traveled 120 miles and landed on target. As the first successful ballistic rocket, the V-2 is the ancestor of most rockets flown today. Looking back, one could make an argument that October 3, 1942 was the beginning of the space age. One could also make an argument it was the beginning of the age of mass destruction. Popularly known as the V-2 - short for Vergeltungswaffe zwei (meaning "retaliation weapon 2") - von Braun's A4 (its technical name was Aggregat-4) became a much-feared military weapon for the Nazis near the end of the war. Launched from Germany (or German-controlled territories), it killed and injured thousands of people and decimated towns in Belgium (especially Antwerp), the south of England (including London) and elsewhere (such as Paris). As World War II was ending, von Braun and his team of more than a hundred scientists turned themselves over to the Americans. It was the best thing that could have happened for the American space program.
EXPERIMENTAL PLANES
As World War II was ending, the United States conceived "The Research Airplane Program." Its purpose, among other things, was to see how experimental planes performed under extreme conditions. The test pilots who flew such planes had to be made of "The Right Stuff." They tested various ranges of speed to help designers develop safer aircraft. Their daring flights helped other pilots determine how fast they could safely fly. One of those daring test pilots was Charles ("Chuck") Yeager. Known for his feats of flying bravery and accuracy during the war, he had become a legend to the men who served with him. No one had ever flown a plane at the speed of sound when Chuck Yeager joined the Research Airplane Program. Planes that approached the speed of sound had encountered new flight issues: drag increased sharply, planes shook violently, and lift and control were lost. Many planes that approached the speed of sound broke apart and crashed. There seemed to be a kind of "sound barrier" through which planes could not fly.
THE SOUND BARRIER
Was there, in fact, a sound barrier? The only way to know for sure was to try and fly a plane as fast as the speed of sound - and then see what happened. U.S. Air Force Captain Chuck Yeager was given the job to find out what happened. Yeager took the controls of an experimental X-1 on October 14, 1947. The X-1, powered with XLR-11 rocket engines, did not take off from the ground under its own power. It was transported under the bomb bay of a B-29 and air-launched at 21,000 feet. When he was dropped from the B-29, Yeager safely ignited the X-1's powerful engines. If they had not ignited, the X-1 would have fallen out of the sky. With powerful engines and a design that minimized drag, Yeager's plane safely flew at 700 miles per hour. It was the speed of sound for his plane given all the flight conditions existing at the time. The "mach meter" on the X-1 recorded a "mach jump" at the moment the plane achieved the speed of sound. (Follow this link to a NASA photograph of the plane at the precise moment it achieved mach speed. Note the exhaust. Note the tape from the mach meter.) For the first time ever, people on the ground at Edwards Air Force Base heard the now-common "sonic boom." Turns out, there was no sound barrier after all. Yeager (follow the link to a video interview with him) had flown right through it. Another obstacle barring supersonic flight had been removed. Was it now possible to fly into space? President John F. Kennedy thought so. He made it a mission for America to achieve a safe manned moon landing and return before the end of the 1960s. (Follow the link to NASA's video of the President giving the now-famous speech.) At the time, it seemed more than the United States could achieve. While the Soviets were moving ahead with satellites and sophisticated space technology, America had experienced a series of humiliating test rocket failures. The race for space - and the moon was on.
THE SPACE RACE
At the start of the space race, America was far behind. The Soviet Union had taken the United States - and the rest of the world - by surprise when it launched the satellite Sputnik in October 1957.  Using the world's first ICBM (intercontinental ballistic missile) - the R-7 - the USSR had achieved a major coup. Americans began to worry the Soviets could launch nuclear warheads aimed at their country. (Only a few years later, Soviet missiles in Cuba could have killed 80 million Americans within ten minutes of launch.) Meanwhile, the United States endured rocket-launch failures. Two months after Sputnik, the U.S. first tried to launch a satellite. The Vanguard rocket failed to perform successfully (on December 6, 1957). Wernher von Braun's new designs for U.S. rockets were not yet ready. Until they were, Americans would be endlessly humiliated and the Russians would continue to score more "firsts" in the space race. The Soviets launched Sputnik 2, a larger and heavier satellite than its predecessor, in November of 1957. The American press and public were upset and demanded to know why the United States was so far behind the USSR. Partly in response to such public reaction, Congress created NASA (the National Aeronautics and Space Administration) to develop an effective space program. On January 31, 1958 the United States successfully launched its first satellite: Explorer. The rocket that launched it was the Jupiter C, a von Braun-team design. Now both countries could spy on each other from space. (The first U.S. spy photo taken from an American satellite was transmitted on August 18, 1960. It is of a Soviet military site in Siberia.)
THE FIRST MAN & WOMAN IN SPACE
Everyone was anxious for people (not just satellites) to fly in space. Russia and the U.S. first sent up several monkeys (this link takes you to a photo of Sam). Experts needed to determine the effects of space travel on mammals. What, for example, was it like to be weightless? Some of the monkeys lived; others did not. (Sam did.) Yuri Gagarin, a 27-year-old Russian, was the first person to fly in space. Although his flight on April 12, 1961 was only one orbit around the Earth, it was a huge accomplishment. Gagarin flew in Vostok and followed specific written procedures for launch, orbit and descent. (Follow the link to view a copy of his original flight plan.) During training exercises for his flight, Gagarin wore a pressure suit. (Follow this link to see it.) A hero of the Soviet Union, Gagarin was honored after his flight (the link takes you to historical film footage). He received the ultimate honor, at age 34, following his death in a plane crash: His ashes were buried inside the Kremlin Wall, in Red Square. The Russians also sent the first woman into space (Valentina Tereshkova) and the first person to venture outside an orbiting space capsule (Aleksei Leonov). Tethered to an airlock, Leonov "walked" outside his orbiting spacecraft on March 18, 1965. He almost died while doing it. His space suit inflated more than expected and Leonov became too large to re-enter the airlock. He had to vent some of the pressure in the suit in order to get back in. With such an impressive string of firsts achieved by the Soviet team, it appeared they would, indeed, be first to reach the moon. But a race is never decided after the first lap. The United States was getting positioned to catch up with, and then pass, the U.S.S.R.
ALAN SHEPARD'S FLIGHT
It was "T minus 1 and counting" on May 5, 1961. Nearly every school-aged child in America had eyes glued to black and white television screens brought into schools just for this moment. They were witnessing an exciting, historic event.  The first American ever, to be launched into space, was strapped in a tiny space capsule at the top of a Redstone MR-7 rocket. At 9:34 a.m., Alan Shepard, one of the original "Mercury Seven," was blasted into the unknown. (There was an escape tower at the top of the capsule, in case things didn't go well and the astronaut had time to get out.) It was about time, most Americans thought. If the Russians could successfully launch and safely return a manned space capsule from orbiting the earth, why not the U.S.? Except that Alan Shepard wasn't going to orbit the earth on May 5th. His mission was just to survive a launch, leave and reenter earth's atmosphere, and return safely to earth. His entire flight, from launch to landing, would take about 15 minutes. While that may not sound like much by today's standards, it was an awesome undertaking at the time - and spellbinding for school children. It was also spellbinding for Shepard who had named his capsule Freedom 7. At launch, his pulse rate jumped from 80 to 126. Eighty-eight seconds after the Redstone rocket hurled him out of the earth's atmosphere, Shepard's head and helmet were shaking so hard he could not read the instruments on his control panel. Seconds later, he was "pulling six Gs" (the force of gravity times six), roughly half the g-forces (11.6) Shepard and his space capsule would endure minutes later during their reentry into earth's atmosphere. He was traveling at 5,134 miles per hour. Stunned by what he saw 116.5 statute miles above earth, Shepard took pictures and exclaimed, "What a beautiful view!" Then, just as quickly as he had left earth, he returned to it. At 10,000 feet, his parachute activated and Freedom 7, with Shepard doing well, hit the Atlantic Ocean. The U.S.S. Lake Champlain was standing by with a helicopter to recover America's first man in space and the tiny capsule which had brought him there.
JOHN GLENN'S ORBIT
Nine months later, school children and their teachers once again watched another American first: John Glenn's launch to orbit the earth. It was February 20, 1962. His flight lasted just under 5 hours (4 hours, 55 minutes, 23 seconds) as he and his space capsule, Friendship 7, (hurled into space by the more powerful Mercury-Atlas rocket) made three orbits around the earth. It wasn't as perfect as Alan Shepard's flight had been, however. At the time, Glenn (and the watching public) did not know how close he came to being lost in space. Mercury Control Center was picking up a strange reading from the spacecraft. It appeared the heat shield was loose. In order for Glenn to safely reenter earth's atmosphere, he needed Friendship 7's heat shield to work. If it didn't, both Glenn and his space capsule would be destroyed during reentry. As Glenn began his descent, everyone watching the telemetry and monitoring the tracking stations nervously watched their screens. Would the loose heat shield be able to withstand the tremendous forces as it returned to earth's atmosphere? As he began reentry, Glenn reported sounds like "small things brushing against the capsule." Then he told mission control, "That's a real fireball outside." Later Glenn said he thought the heat shield might be disintegrating. It was the most stressful part of the flight for Glenn and one of the most critical moments in Project Mercury. The heat shield held. At 17,000 feet above the ocean, Glenn's parachute was fully activated. When he landed in the Atlantic, he was only 40 miles short of the planned pickup site. He had traveled 75,679 statute miles in just under 5 hours, hurtling through space at a speed of 17,544 miles per hour. Alan Shepard and John Glenn became American heroes. Project Mercury was a complete success, and President Kennedy's dream of a manned moon mission before the end of the decade seemed a little closer to reality. But more triumphs, and tragedies, lay ahead. Ed White was about to experience both.
TO THE MOON
One major triumph brought a moon flight much closer to reality. The United States developed, and successfully launched, the mighty Saturn V. Taller than a 36-story building, it was the largest and most powerful three-stage rocket ever built.  With three million parts, it was a giant just waiting for the right time to send a crew to the moon. Not one was ever lost, but not one would have ever flown had engineers (at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama) not solved combustion-instability problems with the F-1 engine (which powered the Saturn V rocket). Several Apollo missions were flown to lessen anxieties about a safe lunar landing (and return) while astronauts were preparing (in Arizona) to walk on the moon. Crew members of Apollo 8 were the first people to see an "earthrise" as their spacecraft made the first loop around the moon. Five months later, Apollo 10 was the first mission to go into lunar orbit. Partially descending to the moon - which can, on rare occasions, appear as a "SuperMoon" to people on Earth - the crew tested the lunar module that would be critical to a safe moon landing. The Soviets, meanwhile, were also rushing ahead with plans for a moon landing. They even had lunar suits ready. An insurmountable problem blocked their way, however. They did not have a rocket comparable to the Saturn V. Prior rockets, sending cosmonauts into space, did not have sufficient power for a moon launch. The N-1, Russia's best effort to successfully build a moon-launch rocket, was a failure. During the first launch attempt (in February, 1969), an engine fire caused the rocket to shut down and crash one minute after take-off. In July, 1969 the test rocket shut down seconds after lift-off, falling onto the launch pad where it exploded. When the launch site was destroyed, so were all Soviet hopes that their crew could reach the moon before Apollo 11's flight. (Follow the link to a U.S. Corona reconnaissance satellite photo of the destroyed launch site.) In a final attempt to at least retrieve lunar surface materials before the Americans, the Soviet Union sent an unmanned robot to the moon. It crash-landed on the moon's surface shortly after Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were the first human beings to step foot on the moon.
APOLLO 11
By July of 1969, Apollo 11 was ready for its historic journey to the moon. So were members of its flight crew: Neil Armstrong, Edwin ("Buzz") Aldrin and Michael Collins.  Strapped in their spacecraft, the men blasted into space on July 16th. The launch, by a three-stage Saturn V rocket - powered with five F-1 engines in its first stage - was spectacular. Aboard command module Columbia, the crew settled in for their long ride to a place where no human being had ever been. Four days later, they were in lunar orbit and, at 4:17 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time, the lunar module landed (the link takes you to the exact spot) on the moon's "Sea of Tranquility." Armstrong radioed Mission Control:
Houston. Tranquility Base here.
The Eagle has landed.
Unbelievable! People from all over the world were glued to their television screens. Nearly seven hours later, at 10:56:15 p.m. EDT, Neil Armstrong took mankind's first step on the surface of the place which he - like children everywhere - had stared at with wonder when he was a boy. Buzz Aldrin followed soon after. He almost didn't take those steps. In fact, the lunar module flashed a yellow caution light 6,000 feet above the lunar surface - before it ever landed. Armstrong advised both Collins, in the command module, and Houston:
Program alarm. It's a 1202.
What was a 1202? An "Executive Overflow" or - using non-technical terms - the computer had too many things to do at once. Should they abort the lunar landing? Quickly, Steve Bales (the Houston flight controller for the lunar module's computer activity) determined everything was fine. Later, when Apollo 11's crew members received their Medals of Freedom, Steve Bales received one too. Without his fast and accurate input, the lunar landing (these three video links feature historical footage and recreated scenes) would not have occurred. Buzz Aldrin also walked on the moon during that first trip while Michael Collins, remaining with Columbia, orbited the moon 30 times. During their 2 hours and 31 minutes of traversing Earth's satellite, Aldrin and Armstrong took pictures of the lunar landscape and of each other. They planted an American flag and left a plaque: Here men from planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon. July 1969 A.D. We came in peace for all mankind. After 21.6 hours total time on the moon, Armstrong and Aldrin safely left the surface in the lunar module and docked with Columbia for their return to earth. Astronauts, on later Apollo missions, were able to use a Lunar Roving Vehicle (this is a PDF link) to inspect the terrain, but Armstrong and Aldrin had only their legs to move about the landscape. The backup commander for Apollo 11, Jim Lovell, was not needed for America's first moon landing. Nine months later, he would make his own trip. He thought he would land on the moon. Instead, Lovell needed all his skills to avoid a space disaster.
APOLLO 13
Everything seemed normal as Apollo 13 made its way through space following launch on April 11, 1970. Some folks said the number "13" should never have been used in the first place. Other folks (who make decisions about such things) weren't bothered by unscientific superstitions. They used the in-sequence mission number. Jim Lovell, commander of the mission, was looking forward to his time on the moon. (The link is NASA's slow-loading exploration plan for Apollo 13.) So was Fred Haise. On the other hand, Ken Mattingly (originally slated as the third member of the crew) was still home in Houston. He'd been exposed to German measles and, seventy-two hours before launch, was replaced by Jack Swigert. Turns out, it was a good thing Mattingly was still on the ground. His expert help would soon be needed by his crew mates. (This link takes you to the official portrait of the crew which includes Mattingly in the middle.) Nearly fifty-six hours into the flight, Apollo 13 was in serious trouble. (This link takes you to the official Report of the Apollo 13 Review Board. It is in PDF format and may take awhile to load.) A short in the current from fuel-cell three had disrupted the cryogenic oxygen tank power supply. Two other shorts occurred a few seconds later. Not only was the mission in trouble, the lives of the crew were in danger. The severely damaged Service Module had lost its ability to produce oxygen and water. Swigert, followed by Lovell, radioed mission control:
Houston, we've had a problem.
Mission Control in Houston, together with Ken Mattingly, feverishly worked out a way to get the crew back to earth. It wasn't easy. The solution was complicated. Meanwhile, with their oxygen being depleted, the crew in space had to power-down their Command Module ("Odyssey"), power-up the Lunar Module ("Aquarius"), and make sure they had working airlines. The tiny LM would not take them to the moon this trip, but it would help to save their lives. Creating a solution on the ground, flight controllers needed to develop a mission-saving system which could be duplicated in space. Simple items, such as cardboard and tape, were used to a create a "mail box" that saved the astronauts. One hour before reentry, the crew jettisoned Aquarius. Their "life boat" would not survive a reentry. Apollo 13 landed in the Pacific Ocean 142 hours, 54 minutes and 41 seconds after lift-off. The USS Iwo Jima recovered the men and Odyssey. Nearly two-thirds of the mission had been under extreme emergency conditions. (These links include historical footage of the launch, the problem and the recovery.) NASA's Houston team - and the flight crew members - had turned in a brilliant performance. Calm thinking by Johnson Space Center personnel, working under extraordinary pressure, helped to save the mission. Returning the crew safely was one of NASA's finest moments. Sixteen years later, horrible misjudgments and a lack of effective teamwork caused one of its greatest disasters.
THE SHUTTLE'S DESIGN FLAW
America's Supersonic Transport Shuttle program was set for its twenty-fifth mission. On board would be a payload specialist whose real job was teaching. Christa McAuliffe would be America's first "teacher in space." Launch was set for January 28, 1986. Unknown by most people, all of the shuttles had a potentially fatal flaw. Roger Boisjoly knew about that flaw. He did his best to warn both his employer, Morton Thiokol, and NASA. But the people to whom he reported wouldn't listen. And the people who made the ultimate decisions at NASA weren't told. As a result, Challenger and its seven-member crew - including America's first teacher in space - were blown out of the sky seventy-three seconds after launch. A potential disaster was looming long before that fateful January day. Although NASA completed twenty-four successful shuttle missions before STS 51-L (the official name for the Challenger mission), other flights had experienced lesser versions of the same problem that caused the Challenger explosion. Trouble is, neither the astronauts nor their families knew about it. But the manufacturer of the shuttle's solid rocket booster (SRB) and solid rocket motor (SRM) knew. So did some of the management officials at NASA. As a result of misjudgments and lack of effective team work, the mission was lost.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES
A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.
Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.) It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories. Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them. Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need. All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly. We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.

YING ZHENG
Who was Ying Zheng? A thirteen-year-old prince, he ascended the throne of Qin (Ch’in) in 247 BC, after his father died. Within twelve years his armies had crushed most of the neighboring states. He had one overriding goal: To unify the country. It had never been done before.
China was a land of contrasts then as it is now. From arid desert to waterfalls, from "stone forests" to fragile flowers alongside the Great Wall, the country and the landscape are diverse. Its ancient music was beautifully haunting. (Follow the link to hear samples. Click on the album covers to launch the music. You will need MP3.)
In the 3rd century BC, diverse and independent war lords were unwilling to recognize one supreme ruler. To unify seven disparate states, Zheng had to use extraordinary force. He obviously made many enemies along the way.
For the first time one state (Qin) exacted obeisance from its neighbors. For the first time one man (Zheng) was in charge. For the first time the walls of the former independent states were linked together - and extended - to form the Great Wall.  (Follow the link to see it from space.) And, for the first time, China had an emperor.
To commemorate his achievements, Ying Zheng took a new name. Believing his deeds (don’t miss this video documentary) surpassed the accomplishments of other ancient rulers (the San-Huang and Wu-Di) he used both of those names (Huang-Di) to create a new title: Emperor. Adding the name of his state, Ying Zheng became Qin Shi Huang-Di (pronounced "chin sher hwang- dee”). It means “The First Emperor," a title that lasted 2,000 years.
As supreme feudal ruler, Shi Huangdi founded the Chinese imperial system and standardized Chinese writing, laws, coinage, weights and measures. He also imposed harsh laws and cruel punishment for those who disobeyed him.
HARSH LAWS
To accomplish so much in so short a time, the First Emperor imposed tough laws. If a member of a public works team didn’t show up at the job site on time, for example, his entire team would be killed.
Confucian scholars disapproved of the Emperor’s methods - and said so in their commentaries, articles and poems. The Emperor’s response was harsh. He followed his prime minister’s advice who
...urged the burning of the histories of all the former states except Qin [Ch’in], folk collections of poetry and articles and books by scholars of schools with views different from those of the Qin. [The First Emperor] ordered this done, but books on medicine, agriculture, and copies of condemned books were preserved in the Imperial capital. A year later he arrested some 400 Confucian scholars, the most active of whom had continued to attack him, and had them buried alive.
(See "Traditional History:  Soldiers of the Qin," at Columbia University's East Asian Curriculum Project.)
Ancient sources report that burying people alive was an old practice among the Qin. Nearly 400,000 soldiers (scroll down halfway) were killed in that fashion after Qin’s defeat of Zhao in 260 BC. At the time, servants were also buried alive to ensure their masters received appropriate care and attention after death.
Despite his ruthlessness, the first Emperor spared soldiers from a similar fate in his own tomb. Instead, about 700,000 workers over 36 years constructed his mausoleum and created thousands of life-size terra cotta soldiers to stand guard over Shi Huangdi after his death.
Those soldiers are now known as the 8th Wonder of the World.
TERRA COTTA SOLDIERS
For more than two thousand years, no one knew an entire army of terra cotta soldiers - in battle formation - were underground near the former imperial capital of Xi-an. These treasures were rediscovered in 1974 when farmers, digging a well, found three vaults filled with some of the most exciting archeological finds of the 20th century.
More than 6,000 soldiers plus a few horses and chariots were in the first pit. Initially archeologists thought each terra cotta figure was unique, most likely patterned after real people.
The second vault contained about 1,400 soldiers and cavalry while a third pit contained 68 officers. Experts now believe each figure was made from a variety of molds which were assembled and covered with clay. Final details for each were carved.
By filling his mausoleum with soldiers, the emperor took great care to protect himself in the afterlife. His actions in burning books, however, greatly damaged the pursuit of knowledge both while he was alive and later. Even the books he ordered saved were eventually destroyed in the chaos following his death in 210 BC.
Ancient sources tell us that life for workers during the Qin (Ch’in) dynasty was filled with misery. “The ditches were filled with corpses” of workers and "piled-up skeletons supported one another."
Although the First Emperor said his dynasty would last 10,000 years, it ended (sparked by a worker’s rebellion) shortly after his death. But the Great Wall (which took the lives of countless laborers) and the Terra Cotta soldiers (standing at attention twenty-three centuries later) remind us of a time when the word of one man (don't miss these videos) resulted in the misery of so many.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES
A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.
Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)
It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.
Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.
Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.
We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content in third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.
NICHOLAS OF MYRA
Saint Nicholas was born in the seaport town of Patara, on the Turkish coast, in about 271 A.D. Although his parents were very wealthy, they died (most likely of plague) when Nicholas was still a boy.
At the time, Turkey was called Asia Minor. Today the ruins of Patara are mostly under the beautiful sandy beaches of the area. Not much has been excavated, although some ruins are visible.
Little is known about the early years of his life. During the centuries, legend has replaced fact. According to Butler’s Lives of the Saints, Nicholas wanted to share the wealth his parents had left him. And it is that sharing of wealth, and how he did it, that led to his increasing fame and his association with protecting children.
 
THE LEGENDS OF SAINT NICHOLAS
Nicholas, while still a teenager, learned of a neighbor in financial trouble. The man had three daughters who wanted to marry. During those times, the father of the bride was expected to provide a dowry. Because the Pataran man had nothing to give, his daughters could not marry.
Hearing of their plight, Nicholas devised a plan (the details of which vary a bit from story to story). Wanting his gift to be anonymous, he passed by the window of his neighbor’s home and threw gold coins into the house. They happened to land in stockings that were drying by the fireplace. The gift of gold was enough for the oldest daughter to marry.
Nicholas repeated his kindness for the second daughter, but when he tried to throw gold coins into the window for the youngest girl, he found the windows locked. He had no choice but to throw the coins down the chimney. Eventually learning the identity of his benefactor, the Pataran villager told everyone about Nicholas’ generosity.
Now a teen-age priest, Nicholas soon moved to the nearby Lycian capital of Myra where fantastic tombs, hewn into the rocks to look like houses, can still be seen. Soon after his arrival in the capital, Nicholas was made bishop of the town. He remains the youngest bishop ever to serve in the history of the Catholic Church.
But not everything was easy for Nicholas. He lived during a time of great persecution against the Church. And as the Bishop of Myra, he was a prime target for torture and imprisonment.
SAINT NICHOLAS OF BARI
Imprisoned for his faith during the time of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, Nicholas was released when Constantine assumed power. He continued his many deeds of kindness and generosity. Legend has it that he also performed many miracles. 
As Bishop of Myra, Nicholas was invited to attend the famous Council of Nicea (the town is now called Iznik). Many important issues were discussed at that Council, including a statement of religious belief known today as the Nicene Creed.
The earliest surviving writings about this famous saint are from the 6th century. Brother Michael, who lived and worked at the Stadium Monastery in ancient Byzantium (later called Constantinople and today Istanbul) also provides an early description.
But, as with most saints and legends, the fame of Nicholas grew after his death. Because he had been kind to children, protected sailors, and gave generously of himself and his material possessions, he became the patron saint of many cities. He even was the Patron Saint of Russia where fabulous icons were created in the 12th and 13th centuries.
When Nicholas died he was approximately 65 years old. Wearing the robes of a bishop, and presumably a white beard, his likeness has been imagined by artists for thousands of years. It is said that only Mary, the mother of Jesus, has been painted more often.
SAINT NICHOLAS, GIVER OF GIFTS
When he died on December 6 (the exact year varies depending on the account), Nicholas was buried in his church at Myra. During the ensuing years, it was damaged, destroyed, repaired and restored. When Muslims raided the town in 1034, the church was completely razed.
Not content to have the remains of the saint stay in Myra, Italians raided his tomb on April 20, 1087 and carried off some of his bones to Bari, Italy. They now rest in the Basilica of St. Nicholas in Bari.
By the Middle Ages, churches all over Europe were named after St. Nicholas. He was made a saint by the Catholic Church and his feast day celebrated on the anniversary of his death: December 6. That day eventually became a time to give gifts, especially to children.
How did this generous man, who loved and protected children, evolve from the legendary provider of doweries to the annual visitor of chimneys? His transformation takes some interesting turns, depending on the country one visits.
SINTERKLAAS VISITS AMERICA
Christmas was not the celebration it is today when St. Nicholas of Bari died. Later, after he was made a saint and the Church began to observe Christmas as a yearly event, the Feast of St. Nicholas was incorporated into the season.
But when the Reformation took hold in Europe, Protestants took a dim view of saints. They especially opposed their veneration. As a result, each country developed its own unique holiday gift-giver: Pere Noel, for example, in France; Father Christmas in England; Kris Kringle in Germany. The Dutch Sinterklaas, with his flowing bishop’s robe and white beard, could be said to most nearly resemble the original Saint Nicholas. When Dutch colonists settled in New Amsterdam (now known as New York City), they brought their Christmas culture and their Feast of St. Nicholas to the New World. Understandably, non-Dutch speakers mispronounced “Sinterklaas.” Soon the famous bishop was called “Santa Claus.”
In those days, Santa Claus was not yet the “jolly old elf” he became in the 19th century. For that transformation, we have to thank Clement Clark Moore, Professor of Classics (and son of Columbia College’s president), who had written a scholarly work on the Hebrew language. Fortunately, the prof had children who needed more than old books and ancient words to entertain them.
A VISIT FROM SAINT NICHOLAS
Clement Moore wrote (the link takes you to his actual manuscript) a much-loved poem "A Visit from Saint Nicholas" - now known as "The Night Before Christmas" - on Christmas Eve, 1822. A gift for his six children, it was the first time anyone described Saint Nicholas as fat and jolly. (Moore probably derived the description from other literary works referring to Dutch merchants in those terms.)
It wasn’t the first time a reindeer was part of the Santa Claus story, though. That occurred a year earlier, in a poem called The Children’s Friend. Expanding the number of reindeer from one to eight, Moore also gave them names.
About 40 years after A Visit From St. Nicholas was published, Thomas Nast used Moore’s "fat and jolly" description to help create the familiar Santa Claus of today. As an illustrator for Harper’s Weekly, Nast created numerous Christmas Drawings. His most famous, pictures St. Nick with a rotund belly while his first, from 1863, shows Santa siding with the Union Army. That drawing, requested by President Lincoln, demoralized the Confederates.
Nast’s engravings depict children calling, or mailing, their mounting requests to a Santa who tries to please. Instead of Saint Nicholas, the patron saint of children, we now have Saint Nicholas, the patron saint for children. Clement Moore and Thomas Nast, particularly, helped to create that fundamental transition. One can only wonder what the real Saint Nicholas would make of his gift-giving legend today. And one can only imagine what Dorey Walker would have said in Miracle on 34th Street had she known what you now know!
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES
A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.
Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)
It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.
Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.
Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.
We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.






















