scientifically based assessments are extremely valuable. These assessments
should be based on protocols developed to ensure that they clearly state, to the
extent possible and in nontechnical language, such information as the current
scientific understanding of the issues, the scientific uncertainties, the predicted
consequences of possible actions, the uncertainties associated with those
predictions, and what additional information is likely to reduce the uncertainties
most rapidly. Deciding on what should be included in such assessments is not a
trivial task, and it will take committees of scientists, natural
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS118
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
resource managers, and decision-makers to determine what information is
possible and how such information should be presented.
Recommendation 3-13: The National Partnership should develop
scientifically based protocols for the preparation of biological assessments
for decision-makers.
Other possible mechanisms for providing such guidance include ensuring
ready access to the scientists who produced the information, identifying other
qualified scientists through directories of scientific expertise (using such
institutions as State Heritage Programs and biological surveys), and forming
standing scientific councils to support local and regional planning and decision-
makers. In addition, clear standards for documenting biological datasets
(metadata) should be implemented. Complete and accurate metadata are the only
means of ensuring that researchers decades from now can use current data
effectively.
Ensuring Scientific Quality
Information provided by the National Partnership must be of the highest
scientific standards to provide the basis for objective and impartial management
decisions and policy. The best ways to ensure such quality are to develop and
implement standards as proposed in Recommendations 3-1, 3-3, and 3-11; and to
use mechanisms to ensure the scientific review of information by appropriate
professionals before it is disseminated to users. That will require a large increase
in formal review by scientists both within the NBS and in the NPBS scientific
community.
Recommendation 3-14: The NBS and other appropriate participants
in the NPBS should adopt measures to ensure a uniformly high quality of
information analyzed, interpreted,
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS119
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
or disseminated by them. Technical reports, articles submitted for publication in scientific journals, and similar products should be subject to
peer review.
Achieving Widespread NPBS Product Communication
The National Partnership must be highly responsive to public and private-
sector needs for primary data and derived products. Existing protocols for
retrieving primary data can be cumbersome and slow. Where networks have been
used to share data or products (e.g., the Gap Analysis Program and Breeding Bird
Survey trend analyses), use of the information has increased substantially. Online
data dictionaries must be adequate to guide appropriate use of the data. The NPBS
should also maintain an online bibliography of its publications and project
descriptions. Access should be facilitated by user-friendly interfaces with
intelligent search and browse capabilities.
The U.S. Global Change Research Program has considered these and many
other issues related to data management and exchange and has drafted a set of
policy statements (Committee on Earth Sciences, 1992). These policies articulate
a commitment to establishing and maintaining long-term data sets, full and open
sharing of the full suite of global data, data archiving, data standards, data access
and affordability, and clear definition of the duration of the period in which
scientists retain exclusive use of original data. These policies extend beyond
primary data to include enhanced data products that are especially useful to users
outside the scientific research community. The Global Change Research Program
data-management policies are consistent with those adopted by the Data and
Information System for the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
(IGBP) and could serve as the core of an NPBS data and information policy.
The NPBS should develop a plan for publication of selected,
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS120
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
peer-reviewed, regional and national primary biological data sets in CD-ROM
form or in other digital media. The Partnership should also expand electronic
publication of data summaries in a form that supports management applications.
Selected regional and national databases and data summaries should be published
in digital formats.
Many users of biological data do not have network access or adequate
hardware and software. Even those who do often require information in other
forms. The NPBS must continue to make print products available. The most
important of those are peer-reviewed scientific articles and reports. Examples of
end products in printed or electronic format that are of fundamental practical
value to those who manage, use, or study biological resources include taxonomic
monographs and revisions; regional floras; faunas; field guides and manuals;
detailed range and habitat maps; atlases of the distribution and trends in regional
biodiversity, ecological communities, and ecological systems; and scientific
studies that interpret existing biological diversity in light of evolutionary history.
Recommendation 3-15: To meet the growing needs of all sectors of society for biodiversity data and information, the National Partnership
should increase its capability for publication and product communication
substantially. That should include increased online access to data, reports,
and bibliographies; publication of selected data sets in CD-ROM format and
in other media; and expanded publication of synthetic documents, such as
atlases and summaries of surveys and trends.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS121
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS122
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
4
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL
PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL
SURVEY
The National Partnership for Biological Survey will provide, for the first
time, an organized framework for collaboration among government and
nongovernment organizations at the national, regional, state, and local levels.
Much of the information on biological resources resides at the state and local
levels, and many decisions about biological resources are made there. Many
government and nongovernment organizations in the United States are active in
the field of biological survey, and all need to participate in a truly comprehensive
national effort.
Because of the broad array of organizations involved in the Partnership,
successful implementation of the concept will require that a complex set of
institutional relationships be managed effectively. The National Biological
Survey being established within the Department of the Interior has a broad range
of responsibilities, but it cannot by itself come close to meeting the full range of
needs and objectives in scientific research, inventory, and information
management described in the preceding chapters. The committee has concluded
that the management of the National
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY123
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Partnership will require flexible and creative approaches to organizational
structure and coordination. The establishment of the NBS provides the catalyst
for establishing a broad new national framework for providing the information
needed to manage our nation's biological resources, with DOI playing a lead role
in establishing the new relationships.
This chapter identifies needs for coordination and collaboration and
recommends ways to meet those needs. The mechanisms discussed are intended
to allow the National Partnership to adapt to changing circumstances and
priorities and to encourage full collaboration among all interested parties. The
unprecedented requirements for coordination among the various entities that
collect, curate, analyze, evaluate, or use data that describe functioning
ecosystems and their components preclude a top-down pyramid of responsibility.
Instead, all the participants in the NPBS should be viewed as active
collaborators. The coordination mechanisms that we discuss are intended to
foster an open collaborative process. The complexity and need for flexibility and
collaboration are illustrated by such examples as Partners In Flight, the
Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Initiative (see Box 4.1). The
organization of Partners in Flight is an example of the kind of networking that
will be needed to achieve the goals of the National Partnership. In fact, Partners
In Flight is only one of many existing national collaborative efforts that will
participate in the NPBS.
The increasing interest in regional management systems—which take into
account not only the requirements for survival of individual endangered species,
but also the future of the ecosystems that sustain them and many others and add
that amenity to human lives—will require increasingly complex cooperative
arrangements. It is a complex problem to balance development—which at its
worst might amount to the one-time conversion of potentially renewable natural
resources and at its best might rest on the sustainable use of those resources—
with the preservation of natural and seminatural areas that include values of other
kinds, as we have seen, for example, in recent years in connec
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY124
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tion with the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest. Considerations of this sort
often also involve international relationships; for example, the work being carried
out by the provincial government of British Columbia, jointly in part with the
government of Montana, includes important innovations in dealing with
ecosystems at a regional level. Similar considerations apply in California, where a
promising coordinated regional strategy involves the cooperation of the pertinent
state and federal agencies, as well as private conservation groups (see Box 3.2).
However, achieving an integrated regional strategy will be complicated by the
dispersion of management authority for different kinds of organisms, habitats,
and water resources over federal, state, and county agencies (see Box 2.3 for an
example).
ROLE AND FUNCTIONS OF NBS
The National Biological Survey should assist in enabling DOI to meet the
diverse mandates of its bureaus, including setting priorities for acquisition of
lands. To accomplish that, the NBS should seek internally to integrate and
standardize inventory, monitoring, and research efforts of the various DOI land-
management agencies. That would cover the almost 300 million acres of DOI-
managed lands and the species that come under DOI management authority. The
NBS should also facilitate access to data necessary to enable state and local
managers to make better informed resource decisions.
In addition, the NBS should be able to identify organisms and communities
at greatest risk and determine their management needs before having to resort to
enforcement of the Endangered Species Act or imposition of stringent regulatory
controls under other authorities. That should be done through research (whether
carried out by the NBS or other agencies), inventory, monitoring, and
communication of the resulting information to policy-makers and land managers.
The NBS should encourage and facilitate the development of
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY125
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 4.1: NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD
CONSERVATION—PARTNERS IN FLIGHT
Declines in neotropical migratory-bird populations have focused
attention on the need for conservation of these species and the lack of firm
data on the status of many. The Partners in Flight program, catalyzed by the
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, brought federal, state, and private
partners together with a common goal to protect species of neotropical
migratory birds and conserve their habitats, including North American
breeding grounds, Latin American wintering grounds, and the migration
routes that connect them. An active partnership including all 50 state fish
and wildlife agencies, 14 federal agencies, and 38 private conservation
organizations and corporations are working together under signed
agreements toward this goal.
With over 350 species breeding in, migrating through, or wintering in
more than a dozen countries from Canada to Latin America, needs were too
big for one organization or country to handle alone. The Fish and Wildlife
Service (FWS) and the state wildlife agencies are leading in expanding
monitoring and population assessment efforts, and the U.S. Forest Service
is aiding in those efforts by conducting research and formulating active
land-management plans. The Bureau of Land Management is conducting
research in management on riparian systems that are vital for breeding,
migration, and wintering habitats in the western half of the United States.
The Department of Defense, the National Park Service, various U.S.
Department of Agriculture agencies, and a vast array of nongovernment
organizations are collaborating with two basic thrusts in mind. The first is to
develop and implement adequate monitoring, analytical, and research
programs to assess the needs of birds and their habitats; and the second is
to implement active land management first on federal lands and then
through partnerships with private landowners that control even larger areas
of the continent. International programs are aided through direct
involvement by Canadian agencies and entities and through the Western
Hemisphere program of FWS working with Latin American countries.
Nine working groups—covering monitoring, research, information and
education, legislative issues, and five regions (including international)—are
focusing on local needs and priorities. Meetings, workshops, and symposia
have advanced a habitat-based initiative focusing on a specific list of
neotropical migrants with priorities for work.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY126
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Working groups include open membership, and meetings are attended
by representatives of federal and state agencies, national and local
nongovernment organizations, universities, and the forest-products
industry. Participants meet as peers to design effective, scientifically
credible conservation plans and have produced a priority list of species, lists
of research priorities on a regional basis, and a needs assessment for
monitoring with protocols for standardized procedures for expanding scope
and coverage. Programs eventually will address land management by
various agencies to benefit neotropical birds. Attention to land-
management agencies with vast holdings of rangelands, parks, refuges,
and national forests is a logical start toward ecosystem-scale management.
The NBS logically would help orient and support this program to
achieve the scale of work necessary for effective conservation of this large
and diverse group of migratory birds.
NPBS research to meet the needs of the nation for biological resources and
sustainable ecosystems. The effort will encourage other agencies and groups to
see themselves in the context of the larger enterprise. Much necessary monitoring
and much of the essential research will be done by agencies and entities other
than the NBS. In addition, the NBS should establish institutional points of
contact to facilitate communication among the various elements of the National
Partnership.
Recommendation 4-1: The NBS should have a dual mission: to meet
the scientific research and information needs of DOI for management of the
lands within its jurisdiction and species for which it has responsibility (and
geographic areas that affect either of the above) and to provide national
leadership and vision for the NPBS.
Although the NBS will be a scientific organization, it must have strong and
reciprocal relationships with management experts in
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY127
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
DOI bureaus, so that their mandates can be met through accurate and timely
scientific information. Meeting these demands for knowledge to support the
management functions of DOI will create a tension with the goal of serving as the
core agency for the National Partnership. There will be some creative tension
between the desire to pursue new scientific inquiries about biological resources
and the need to conduct studies that are focused specifically on current
management needs. The early history of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in
DOI clearly illustrates those tensions (see Box 4.2) Mechanisms should be
identified to ensure that the NBS can meet each of these equally important parts
of its dual mission in the long term.
One of the reasons cited by the Secretary of the Interior for the
establishment of the NBS was the need to ensure objective, high-quality science
that will be responsive to user needs. Several groups have raised a concern that an
independent NBS will be less responsive to the user needs of the land-
management agencies in DOI than the present organizational arrangement, where
research expertise is contained within each of the relevant agencies.
The NBS must have the expertise necessary to design and conduct research,
interpret results and share them with decision-makers in other bureaus, and
coordinate the nation's broader efforts in the National Partnership—including
identifying gaps in expertise and research and seeking to fill them either through
the NBS or through the resources and mandates of other agencies and
organizations. In this view, the NBS has a responsibility to take the broadest
possible perspective and to help the country to recognize its deficiencies in
knowledge and expertise. No government agency today has such a mandate, and
many kinds of research are not done. Many scientists believe that organismal
biology has declined, in part for this reason.
DOI does not and cannot possess all the scientific skills or personnel to carry
out the functions of the NPBS by itself. In a sense, DOI should operate its NBS
as a ''national trust'' designed to ensure the success of the National Partnership for
Biological Survey. Its dual mission requires balancing specific needs for
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY128
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
DOI programs with the broader needs of the country. The hands-on scientific
work of the NBS should be lean and focused. In other words, in-house research,
monitoring, analysis, and application to problems of ecosystem management
should be directed primarily at DOI management and mission needs, and many of
these needs should be met through contracts and grants so as to maintain a
national network of capabilities. A cadre of experienced scientists should work
with other participants in the National Partnership to identify information needs
and stimulate programs that will satisfy those needs and provide leadership.
The fundamental purpose of the NBS is to provide a rational and objective
scientific basis for meaningful stewardship of the nation's biological resources. Its
scientific credibility and reputation are therefore of utmost importance, and they
must be protected and reflected in a comprehensive and rational leadership plan.
The conduct of scientific investigations at the NBS should be as free as
possible from political influences that could adversely affect the scientific
credibility of the new agency or prevent it from performing research that,
although it could lead to politically unpopular results, is scientifically necessary.
A well-managed and effective program of external review of the NBS programs
will be essential, and peer review of all programs in the NBS is highly
recommended. The director of the NBS must be an acknowledged and respected
professional leader in the biological-science community and should be selected in
a way that helps to ensure the scientific independence of the agency, as has long
been the case in the selection of the director of USGS. The director of the NBS
could be appointed for a 6-year, once-renewable term of office and selected from a
list of candidates suggested to the Secretary of the Interior by appropriate
representatives of the scientific community. A chief scientist should be similarly
appointed, and the term of office could be staggered with that of the director for
purposes of continuity. The chief scientist should be free of management
responsibilities other than for the development of scientific programs.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY129
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 4.2: BALANCING USER NEEDS WITH THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE: THE EARLY EXPERIENCE OF
THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The U.S. Geological Survey, created on March 3, 1879, was charged
with the following combination of responsibilities: "classification of the public
lands and examination of geological structure, mineral resources, and
products of the national domain." The legislation stemmed from a report of
the National Academy of Sciences, which in June 1878 had been asked by
Congress to provide a plan for surveying the territories of the United States.
For the survey's initial program of work, the first director, Clarence
King, chose to emphasize mining geology, to devote but a small effort to
general geology, and to confine paleontology and topographic mapping to
what was necessary to support the geologic studies. In doing so, King
emphasized practical studies at the expense of basic ones. He nonetheless
expected that the facts gathered in the mining geology studies would lead to
advances in basic science.
A mining geology program began in 1879 with comprehensive studies
of the geology and technology of three great mining districts—Leadville in
Colorado and Comstock and Eureka in Nevada—and the collection of
mineral statistics in the western states. In addition, through a cooperative
arrangement with the Tenth Census, mineral statistics were collected in the
eastern states, iron resources in all parts of the country were systematically
studied in the field and in the laboratory by a variety of techniques, and an
effort was made to trace the continuation of the copper-bearing rocks of
Michigan and Wisconsin through northeast Minnesota to the Canada
boundary. There investigations in general geology included the unfinished
studies of the earlier surveys in the Colorado Plateau region, on the
Quaternary history of valleys in Utah, and on the geology of the Rocky
Mountain region north of New Mexico and west of the 94th meridian.
King resigned as director in March 1881. Despite his short tenure, he
had such a profound influence on the survey's organization and mode of
operation that his imprint was clearly evident decades later and still can be
recognized. King's choice to succeed him was John Wesley Powell, almost
King's antithesis in background, education, and experience. Both had
wide-ranging scientific interests, but King's centered on mathematics and
geophysics, and Powell's tended toward natural history and anthropology.
In geology, which Powell considered part of geography, he was primarily
concerned with land forms and land use.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY130
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
King and Powell also differed greatly in their philosophies of
administration, which King apparently did not realize when he resigned.
King had given the work of the geological survey a mission orientation,
planned the goals, and selected the staff, but given them freedom to choose
their methods of work in order to achieve the goals. Powell allowed the staff
to choose not only their methods of work but the subjects they would
investigate as well. That alone meant an immediate change in the
geological survey's program. In addition, because Powell looked on geology
and topography as independent but closely related parts of the greater field
of geography, he made the topographic work of the geological survey
independent of geologic studies as soon as he became director.
During Powell's first 3 years as director, the survey prospered, and its
appropriations grew steadily, amounting to $386,000 for the fiscal year
beginning July 1, 1884. By that time, King's simple organization of the
survey into mining geology and general geology had been transformed.
General geology, initially described by Powell as structural geology and
paleontology, became five divisions of geology and five of paleontology.
The chemical laboratory, mining statistics, preparation of illustrations, and
the library were "accessory" divisions. Without benefit of formal
organization, the geological survey was also investigating the irrigation of
arid lands, the relief from floods that would be afforded the lower valley of
the Mississippi by using waters from the Rocky Mountains for irrigation, and
the geographic distribution of the great forest areas.
In a mood for economy, Congress in 1892 slashed appropriations for
scientific agencies, especially those items which seemed to have little
immediate practical purpose. The Geological Survey's appropriations for
geological surveys, paleontology, and chemistry and physics were
drastically reduced, and several statutory positions were eliminated. Only
the appropriation for the report on mineral resources went unscathed,
although the appropriation for topographic surveys was cut only a little. The
Senate then appointed a Select Committee to "investigate the operations of
the United States Geological Survey, the efficiency and utility of such a
survey, together with the progress made and economy observed in this
work."
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY131
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
The congressional action was clearly aimed at Powell and his
administration of the Geological Survey. The principal reason was that
Survey science was not serving the great economic interests of the country
although the all-encompassing nature of the Survey work or resentment of
Powell's ideas of land reform and the closing of the public domain during
the Irrigation Survey, to which some historians have attributed the action,
may have played a part. In particular, Senators from the mining states in the
West, which were also states in the arid regions, wanted economic geology
restored to the preeminent position it had had under King, and members of
Congress in the South and East wanted economic geology investigation in
their regions. A few powerful Senators in fact wanted to force Powell's
resignation and to restore King to the directorship.
Powell submitted his resignation in May 1894. The Secretary of the
Interior promptly recommended to President Cleveland the appointment of
Charles D. Walcott as the third director.
Basic science was an integral part of the Geologic Branch under
Walcott. Fundamental studies were made in the genesis of ore deposits, in
paleontology and stratigraphy, in glacial geology, and in petrography. The
geologic time scale was revised, new definitions for rock classes were
developed, and the first geologic map folios were published.
COORDINATING THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP
In its deliberations about coordination and management of the NPBS, the
committee reached the following conclusions:
1. Coordination among federal agencies, with state and local agencies,
and with such entities as museums and universities is a key to the
success of the NPBS. These participants perform different activities
that are essential for the generation of useful information, and the
needs identified in Chapters 1 and 2 cut across the geographic foci of
the activities and jurisdictions of these organizations. Effective
coordination mechanisms will
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY132
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
facilitate the ability of the Partnership to perform work that crosses
political and jurisdictional boundaries.
2. The most important long-term consideration for local, state, and
federal management and regulatory agencies and many private-
sector users will be the use of NPBS-generated, scientifically based
information by decision-making bodies and policy-setters. The
information will directly enhance land-and water-use practices for
the preservation and management of biological resources.
3. An important guiding concept is to work through state organizations
for local application of NPBS data. Whereas ecosystems and biota
are not constrained by state boundaries, the current structures of
most DOI agencies and many other federal agencies recognize state
boundaries. For example the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is
organized on the basis of state offices, and BLM districts lie
primarily within state boundaries. National Wildlife Refuges and
National Marine Sanctuaries are encompassed primarily within state
boundaries, as are national parks, Indian reservations, and many
reclamation projects. Most national forests lie within state
boundaries, as do most military reservations. The USGS Water
Resource Division has state offices. Other federal agencies such as
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) also recognize state boundaries.
There are strong reasons to have a focus on states within a broader
organizational framework—it gets things done on the ground. State
agencies that are critical to the success of the NBS include wildlife
agencies, parks, forestry and land agencies, environmental regulatory
agencies, museums, universities, and biological (natural history)
surveys. Much wider recognition must be accorded the broad
authority of county governments over land-use planning on both
public and private lands. Once federal regulatory decisions or court
actions are complete, implementation of programs is often at the
county level by entities that traditionally have not had ready access
to, or skills to interpret, biological data.
4. Both NPBS and NBS activities might develop a scientific
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY133
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
focus on regions larger than the states, but the regions should be
determined by problem-specific needs and situations. Because a state
organizational structure for the NBS is recommended, it is unlikely
that either the National Partnership or the NBS needs alternative
geographical bases. Nonetheless, collection, analysis, and
dissemination of data may, for some purposes, be categorized by
ecological criteria that do not necessarily correspond with any
political boundaries, such as watersheds, vegetation zones, or
wildlife migration routes.
The above conclusions, along with findings described in earlier chapters,
have led the committee to believe that an effective coordination mechanism is
required. Because the scope of the activities of the National Partnership are quite
broad, and because of the extensive amount of intergovernmental and
nongovernmental coordination, the committee believes that no existing model for
national and federal coordination is readily adaptable to the National Partnership
for Biological Survey. A unique and innovative process for coordination will
probably need to be developed. The committee did not attempt to prescribe a
detailed coordination mechanism. Instead, the committee concluded that a formal
mechanism should be established and that it should embody the specific
characteristics described below.
Mechanism for National Coordination
Recommendation 4-2: Formal mechanisms should be established for
coordination among the entities with responsibilities for the National
Partnership for Biological Survey. The mechanisms should collectively
exhibit the five characteristics described below.
The coordination mechanisms should
• Provide for high-level, balanced input from diverse partici#
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY134
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
pants and users into the development and implementation of the
Partnership. Because the NPBS will be a national program that cuts
across political, jurisdictional, and geographic boundaries and involving
both governmental and nongovernmental entities, it needs a mechanism
through which all sectors involved can advocate, justify, and discuss
proposed programs and activities that will affect them and, to the degree
possible, reach consensus on a balanced and effective agenda. Bottom-
up input, although important, is not sufficient to ensure that participants
and users will communicate sufficiently with each other, that the federal
participants in the Partnership will obtain sufficient and balanced input
from nonfederal participants, or that nonfederal participants will have
sufficient authority within the program to ensure their involvement.
• Take full advantage of the federated structure of American
government, in particular the states. The key role of states in the
management of the nation's biological resources, in the structure of
Congress, and in other aspects of government makes them natural foci
for Partnership programs and activities.
• Have a clear lead organization with primary responsibility and authority
for fostering coordination. Only a federal government entity has the
breadth of charge, access to resources, and sufficiently broad mission
responsibility to play this role. Within the constellation of federal
agencies, and for reasons described in Chapter 1, the committee believes
that the lead agency should be DOI. The most logical alternative focus,
the Executive Office of the President (EOP), was rejected by the
committee for four reasons: First, the committee believes that an agency
with mission responsibility related to the nation's biological resources
would be able to focus more effectively on the needs of the Partnership
than can the EOP with its myriad responsibilities and need to respond to
shifting issues. Second, the lead agency can take direct action in
response to input from participants and users, whereas the EOP must
work through mission agencies. Third, although the EOP has a number
of policy-coordination responsi
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY135
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
bilities, it is not itself operational and cannot act on the kinds of day-to-
day issues that the Partnership will involve. Fourth, the EOP does not
have the kinds of mechanisms for direct involvement with the states that
are critical to a program like the Partnership with its substantial
nonfederal participation.
• Provide for continuity of involvement by participants and users. As
discussed in previous chapters, an effective Partnership will require
long-term, continuous commitment from those involved. Temporary
advisory bodies can play important roles, but they are not an adequate
substitute for a permanent mechanism of coordination that will play a
key role in such tasks as the developing and implementing standards for
data acquisition and information management, making sure that what is
learned from Partnership activities shapes future programs and priorities
appropriately, and ensuring that participants and users have timely, up-
to-date information on the status of and trends of changes in the nation's
biological resources.
• Be designed to encourage active, voluntary participation. Because of the
diverse character of the Partnership, much of the involvement in it will
need to be voluntary, especially for nonfederal participants. If the
program is to be successful, ways must be found for all key stakeholders
to "buy in" to the process and support it over time. A top-down,
centralized approach is unlikely to engender the full and enthusiastic
cooperation of all critical participants. Coordination will best be
achieved through leadership, consensus-building, and positive
incentives, such as funding for interagency collaborative activities, state
programs, and extramural research, provision for personnel exchange,
the development of a strong sense of shared mission, and unequivocal
support from key leaders throughout the participating community.
In addition to the Partners In Flight program, the committee reviewed a
number of possible models for national and federal coordination, including the
National Commission on AIDS, the Federal Drug Policy Office, the Federal
Coordinating Council on Science, Engineering, and Technology, the Arctic
Research
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY136
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Commission and the Interagency Arctic Research and Policy Committee. The
committee believes that none can serve as an exact model for the coordination
mechanisms needed for the Partnership, but the committee was able to draw
concepts from each to create several possible approaches, which are discussed
below.
Coordination among nonfederal participants might be accomplished via a
standing body comprised of appropriate representatives of those involved in the
Partnership, such as state agencies, national scientific institutions, major scientific
disciplines, nongovernment natural-resource organizations, museums, and
private-sector organizations involved in the development and management of
biological resources. The link to federal programs could be provided through the
Secretary of the Interior. Such a group could identify and recommend national
(not solely federal) policies and priorities for biological-resource assessment (not
management decisions) and make recommendations for all segments of the
Partnership, both federal and nonfederal. It could also review NPBS programs for
their appropriateness to policies and priorities and recommend appropriate
changes.
In the committee's view, what is needed is a high-level forum for the
discussion, development, and implementation of policies and priorities for all
nonfederal stakeholders in the National Partnership, not merely an advisory
body. Recommendations for programs would be passed to the appropriate entity
for action and feedback. Each representative would work directly within the
sector of the community (e.g., museums, etc.) that he or she represents to
implement policies and priorities.
An effective mechanism for federal coordination might be an
interdepartmental committee on biological survey. Such a committee could be
chaired by the Secretary of the Interior and include the heads of key federal
departments and agencies involved in the Partnership, especially the Departments
of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, and Transportation, EPA, and the National
Science Foundation. The mechanism should provide
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY137
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
cross-agency coordination of federal policies and participation in the Partnership
and it should identify federal-agency priorities for the conduct of biological
research and resource assessments.
The interagency committee would be both a forum for high-level policy
discussion and coordination and a framework for increased day-to-day interaction
at the working level. Issues related to the implementation of the National
Partnership by the federal government could be effectively coordinated by this
committee, which would function as a peer agency, without the need for
extensive involvement by the Executive Office of the President. However, the
President could increase incentives for coordination through the budget process
—for example, higher budgetary priority could be given to collaborative work
such as the regional projects described in Chapter 2 (Recommendation 2-13), than
for noncollaborative work in a given region. Any major interagency policy
disputes that could not be settled by the federal coordinating mechanism likely
would need to be handled through established policy-coordination procedures in
the White House. A means for regular feedback between the federal and
nonfederal coordinating mechanisms should also be established.
Appropriate mechanisms also need to be established to obtain scientific
advice for the Partnership and to ensure proper data management. These
mechanisms would identify priorities for research and protocols for surveys and
inventories; establish procedures for quality assurance in research and data
management, including the development of database standards; plan the
development of the NPBS data network; and develop recommendations for
ensuring access to data by public and private users. One way to obtain the
necessary advice and guidance would be to establish committees in science and
data management.
Coordination within the Department of the Interior
Much of the work of the NBS will be directed toward providing
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY138
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
high-quality scientific information to improve decision-making by the land-
management agencies within DOI. The department has proposed the
establishment of a policy board consisting of senior representatives of all DOI
bureaus, whose function would be to ''offer guidance to identify priorities for
NBS so that it can produce data useful for resource managers.'' Establishment of
such a board by secretarial order would underscore its importance. It should be
chaired by the director of the NBS. In addition, a secretarial order could establish a
process and criteria for identifying and setting priorities for research needs within
the department. The process should provide for field managers to identify
research needs and local and regional priorities, which would be reviewed and
consolidated into the NBS research program. It should permit open discussion of
priorities within the department, in the recognition that funding limitations
probably will not permit all research needs to be met.
Field and State Coordination
Recommendation 4-3: The Secretary of the Interior should establish,
through either existing or new DOI or other appropriate facilities, an office
in each state to facilitate joint NBS and broader Partnership activities and to
provide a communication channel among state agencies, private and
individual participants, and federal agencies.
This might be the most important consideration for ensuring that the NBS
achieves liaison with all possible contributors. DOI (through BLM, National Park
Service [NPS], the Minerals Management Service, USGS, and The Fish and
Wildlife Service [FWS]) has a working relationship for land management with
state and county governments and has regulatory relationships for trust species
through the Endangered Species Act, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, Great Lakes
Fishery Councils, various fisheries legislation, and other laws. Therefore, this
relationship can
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY139
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
logically be a starting point for coordination at the state level. The proposed
offices should provide for coordination among USDA, EPA, DOI, the
Department of Defense (DOD), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), the U.S. Forest Service, and any other federal agency
charged with working within a state, as well as with relevant state and private
agencies, such as museums, universities, and conservation organizations.
An appropriate mechanism for coordination at the state level would be
planning or steering committees that would coordinate biological research and
inventory activities within each state. Such committees would consist of
representatives of state and federal agencies and other cooperating parties.
The precise composition and size of the committees would need to be
appropriate for the needs of their particular states. The committees would provide
for data management and accessibility to user groups within their states. The state
committees would maintain liaison and information transfer with the coordinating
bodies.
BUDGETARY CONSIDERATIONS
The formal establishment, organization, management, and coordination of
the National Partnership for Biological Survey will greatly improve the
effectiveness of federal expenditures on biological science relevant to natural-
resource management. An informal inventory of federal spending on research in
environmental biology identified annual total federal spending of almost $1
billion, excluding inventory and data-management activities. The coordination
mechanisms recommended in this chapter will greatly improve the efficiency and
expenditure of federal funding, including evaluation and prioritization of current
spending on programs relevant to the goals of the Partnership. Nonetheless, there
likely will be a need for increased federal investments. In view of the
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY140
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
purpose and objectives of the National Partnership, there appear to be a number
of important gaps in current federal and national programs. Bridging those gaps
will require both new and expanded federal programs.
Department of Interior
On the basis of the material submitted to the committee by DOI, it appears
that all the existing biological research activities and expertise in the land-
management bureaus have been identified for possible transfer to the NBS. We
believe that such a sharp distinction of responsibility will not adequately meet the
needs of the land-management bureaus. For example, in many instances a land
manager might require on-site scientific expertise to address an immediate and
narrow issue. Under the department's proposal, such requirements would have to
be met by the NBS. We believe that this arrangement would not be most
responsive to the land manager's needs and would unduly burden the NBS with
tasks that would not contribute to the nation's understanding of its biological
resources. We recommend that the land-management bureaus retain sufficient
scientific expertise to accomplish three separate functions: to address unique
site-specific biological-resource issues at individual land-management units, to
address specific short-term issues, and to facilitate interaction between the land-
management bureaus and the NBS to ensure that the NBS is responsive to the
needs of the other bureaus. Such retention would require a careful examination of
the activities and expertise currently proposed for transfer to the NBS—an
examination that could be conducted if the proposed personnel transfers are
implemented in phases, as recommended in Chapter 5. It would also require
addition of resources to the NBS to enable it to meet its mission. The issue of how
best to balance the scientific research needs specific to individual bureaus with
larger, cross-bureau and national needs is important and
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY141
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
should probably be addressed in a study by an independent group of experts.
The NBS needs to develop a core staff capability in an appropriate range of
the biological and information sciences. It will need to augment its initial staff
capability with new staff in key scientific disciplines. The staff proposed to be
transferred initially to the NBS were employed for other reasons, already have a
full range of responsibilities, and might not be appropriate for transfer to the
NBS. The NBS will need additional scientific staff in such areas as botany,
taxonomy and systematics, population biology, invertebrate zoology, ecology,
social sciences, statistical design and analysis, and information sciences.
Recommendation 4-4: The NBS should perform a systematic
assessment of needs based on existing staff capabilities and program
requirements and develop and implement a plan to hire needed experts. This
should be the highest priority in the application of additional budget and staffing resources. In addition, the NBS should have the core staff capability
necessary to support the coordination mechanisms of the National
Partnership.
It is equally important that the internal staff capability within the NBS be
held to a minimum. The NBS should not attempt to "do it all" with in-house staff.
Rather, it should seek to use other federal resources and to rely increasingly on
externally funded research to meet its mission requirements. Those points are
discussed in more detail below.
Many of the scientific disciplines and the expertise needed by the NBS are
currently in other federal programs. DOI therefore has arranged for the temporary
detail of a number of key people from other agencies to DOI to assist in the
formation of the NBS and recommends that this practice be extended and
expanded. Temporary personnel exchanges between the NBS, other federal
agencies, and other participants in the NPBS can be an effective way to augment
NBS scientific expertise and core capabilities.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY142
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Such exchanges also can provide an opportunity for NBS personnel to learn
more about other federal agencies' programs and thus promote increased
coordination and enhance opportunities to develop cooperative activities.
Interagency personnel exchanges can be an effective mechanism to leverage
existing federal personnel resources, minimize duplication among the agencies,
and provide a rapid infusion of additional skills to the NBS.
Recommendation 4-5: DOI and the NBS should establish a continuing
program of personnel exchanges among the federal agencies and other participants in the NPBS. Such exchanges will help to provide needed
expertise to the NBS, minimize duplication of effort, and promote improved
coordination among federal programs.
Biological research covers a broad spectrum from fundamental research to
focused and locally applicable research. A robust national program of biological
research must encompass the entire spectrum. Increased federal investments in
basic research in support of NPBS needs should be assigned to NSF, which has
management expertise and experience in supporting basic scientific research. The
increased funding should be focused on increasing the amount of research on
biological issues that directly assist NPBS needs. Increased federal research
investments in the NBS initially should be focused on augmenting research
programs that are directed toward DOI's mission requirements. Many of these
programs focus on ecosystem biology and management. It will be appropriate to
consider adding funding in the future to enhance NBS programs in conducting
extramural research. Peer review of all these components is essential to their
continued success.
Recommendation 4-6: The NBS should rely strongly on extramural
research to meet its mission requirements.
To meet the needs of the land-management agencies in DOI, the NBS will
need to perform much short-term research. It
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY143
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
should seek to rely heavily on extramural research, much of which can be
implemented through the Cooperative Research Units (CRUs) to be transferred to
the NBS from FWS and NPS. New funding would be needed to staff existing
CRUs fully and to build the broader programs needed for the NBS to be
successful. Increased reliance on extramural research programs at the CRUs can
also strengthen training programs for future biological scientists. Staffing needs
for CRUs should clearly be an important focus of the recommended needs
assessment for NBS.
DOI should expand the scope of CRUs to include agreements with the
nation's universities, museums, and other appropriate parties to operate or
support programs or laboratories focused on specific groups of organisms and
studies of ecosystems. The taxonomic units would train specialists, conduct
surveys, complete taxonomic research, develop research and reference
collections, and maintain taxon-specific databases. The CRU model has served
wildlife and fisheries management needs well, and it could meet critical needs for
research on taxa of concern to DOI missions.
Recommendation 4-7: The NBS should develop mechanisms to use
research and inventory programs in other federal agencies.
There are extensive biological research and inventory programs in NOAA,
USDA, EPA, the Smithsonian Institution, and DOD. Each of those agency
programs would make substantial contributions to the NPBS. Their coordination
and integration could be accomplished through the proposed coordination
mechanisms. However, because the other federal programs are governed by their
missions and legislative authorities, they might not be fully responsive to the
broader purpose and objectives of the NPBS in the absence of additional
incentives. The NBS might have to enter into specific cooperative agreements
with the other agencies and provide cofunding for specific programs. Effective
use of the
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY144
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
other federal programs will necessitate some funding increases for NBS to
support new interagency collaborative research activities. However, the increased
investments by the NBS would be cost-effective, in that they would avoid the
need for the NBS to undertake large new programs of its own.
Recommendation 4-8: The Secretary of the Interior should support expanding the scope of financial assistance for state programs to make the
states full participants in the National Partnership.
The states receive funding for activities under the Pittman-Robertson,
Wallop-Breaux, and Endangered Species Acts that covers research surveys and
inventories and management actions focused on sport fish, game animals, and
endangered species, respectively. The states have undertaken a much broader
range of programs, including Heritage Data Centers, that focus on a broad range
of biological resources and will have a critical role in the evolving NPBS. DOI
should work with the states to expand the scope of financial support for state
programs as important components of the NPBS.
Budget Prioritization
In terms of the NBS, the recommendations listed in this section on budgetary
considerations should have high priority for any federal budget increases;
additions to the NBS core staff should have the highest priority. The budget
increases for the priority areas discussed in this chapter could be offset to some
extent through a careful review and restructuring of the programs transferred to
the NBS from other bureaus. The committee recognizes that many worthy
programs need to compete for federal and nonfederal funds. To the greatest
extent possible, additional funding for the National Partnership should be made
available
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY145
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
from savings that result from the increased efficiency that will come from more
effective coordination and from programs that are judged to have lower priority.
Specific recommendations for reprogramming are beyond the purview of this
committee. However, it should be noted that new investments made in the work
of the Partnership are very likely to result in net long-term budgetary savings by
helping to anticipate and avoid costly environmental conflicts and repair efforts.
DOI, through the NBS, should immediately begin to exercise the leadership
and coordination responsibilities recommended by this committee to leverage
other federal biological research spending more effectively. Initial high-priority
subjects for increased leveraging and coordination of federal biological research
spending would include those mentioned in Chapter 2. Effective leveraging of
other federal programs might necessitate small increases in NBS budgets for
interagency collaborative research activities.
Non-DOI Federal Agencies
Recommendation 4-9: Agencies whose participation is essential to the
success of the National Partnership, especially NSF, should receive increased
funding for the study of U.S. biodiversity so that the NPBS can take full
advantage of the nation's taxonomic and ecological expertise.
Such support should represent a long-term commitment to the goals of the
NPBS. We believe that the recommendations adopted by the National Science
Board (1989) for biodiversity research should be implemented as soon as possible
to enhance the national and global contribution of U.S. science in this field. These
were not specifically focused on biodiversity within the United States, but added
emphasis on the national territory would greatly enhance the objectives of the
Partnership and is compatible with the
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY146
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
aims of the National Science Board report. NSF's program of extramural funding
reaches all segments of the academic community. We therefore concluded that
increasing funding levels for the appropriate programs would be an effective way
of improving the scientific knowledge appropriate for dealing with biodiversity in
the U.S.
To examine the actual and potential role of NSF in supporting the study of
U.S. biodiversity, it is pertinent first to review current funding levels, using FY
1992 as a baseline. For community ecology, ecosystem research, and long-term
ecological research, more than 80% of all new awards, amounting to about $19
million in FY 1992, were made for research conducted in the United States.
Similarly, about 80% of new awards in population biology, amounting to about
$4.5 million, were made for studies in the United States. For systematics research
relevant to the NPBS, however, the total allocation for new awards in FY 1992
was only $0.8 million (about one-third of the total awarded—for nine grants), and
for taxonomic monographs and revisions, only $0.4 million (for three grants of
the seven awarded); $6 million was awarded for the support of all systematics
collections. Given that hundreds of individual scientists, working individually and
cooperatively, are able to contribute substantially to our knowledge of U.S. biota
if adequately funded, those figures were obviously much too low to serve the
national interest well. New funds should be sought to support biotic surveys,
inventories, and monographs directed at priority groups recognized by the NPBS.
These funds should include publication and dissemination costs, which are an
important part of the NPBS effort (see Chapter 3). Similar programs, using
systems of peer review like those used successfully by NSF, should be
implemented to the greatest extent possible by the other agencies engaged in the
National Partnership.
Funding will also need to be made available for other agencies whose
participation is essential to the success of the Partnership. Units whose activities
are already integral parts of the national
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY147
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
effort in biological survey—such as the National Marine Fisheries Service, the
National Ocean Service, and the Forest Service—will need additional resources if
they are to play the roles for which they are well suited in the overall effort. The
parts of DOD oriented to biological survey will likewise need additional
resources to become full partners in the NPBS, and these resources must be
sought in future budget cycles. The roles of the above agencies with respect to the
National Partnership should be clearly established as an official part of their
missions. For such organizations as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, however,
which have extensive land-management and permitting responsibilities and large
cadres of biologists, appropriate steps should be taken to allow them to address
directly the needs of the NPBS in the future; the national welfare clearly makes
such a mandate highly desirable. Future funding needs for the other agencies
should be carefully assessed within the framework of the NPBS. There also
should be opportunities to use existing resources more efficiently and effectively
through better integration and coordination.
RELATIONSHIP TO RECOMMENDATIONS OF OTHER
REPORTS
Since December 1992, a number of reports on subjects relevant to this
committee's work have emerged. Specifically, reports have been released by the
National Research Council's Committee on Environmental Research (NRC), the
Carnegie Commission on Science and Technology (Carnegie), and the National
Commission on the Environment (NCE); and the Committee on the National
Institute for the Environment (CNIE) has continued to evolve its ideas. The
proposals from those groups bear on the recommendations in this report. In
addition, the new national administration and Congress have been active in
proposing or implementing changes. Those activities are reviewed briefly to place
our report in context.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY148
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
There is a strong concordance among the reports of NRC, Carnegie, NCE,
and CNIE in analyzing the problems that face environmental research. All
recognize the need for leadership at the highest levels of government, the need
for a national strategy, and the need for coordination of efforts among the many
agencies performing environmental research. All emphasize the need for a status
and trends program and for improvements in information-gathering and handling
in government. All those are also key recommendations of the present
committee.
The reports differ, however, in the means that they propose for organizing
the effort to solve the problems. CNIE proposes the formation of a National
Institute for the Environment. Carnegie and NCE vest the Office of
Environmental Quality and EPA with substantial responsibilities. NRC
emphasizes the importance of cultural changes, such as a focus on long-term
studies and creation of a National Environmental Council, that would be
implemented whether departments were left as is or a suggested Department of
the Environment were established. The implementation of any of the broad-scale
recommendations in the other reports could affect the utility of some of the
specific recommendations in this one. However, this committee believes that the
broad needs, functional requirements, and recommendations made here would
not be affected. A strong National Partnership, with a key central role for the
National Biological Survey, will remain essential for understanding the current
state of the nation's biological resources, how that state is changing, and the
causes of those changes.
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY149
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY150
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
5
IMPLEMENTATION
The purpose and objectives of the National Biological Survey and the
National Partnership for Biological Survey are broad and ambitious. They will
not be reached quickly or easily. The Department of the Interior already has
acknowledged that the internal reorganization leading to the establishment of the
NBS on October 1, 1993, is only the first step toward a fully functional NBS.
The committee strongly believes that specific implementation steps for both
the NBS and the National Partnership should be phased in over a multiyear period
according to a well-planned strategy. Otherwise, it is likely that too many tasks
will be initiated at once with insufficient personnel and budgetary resources, that
programs will be started before clear goals have been established, and that the
results will therefore fall short of the high expectations for providing the effective
and credible scientific information needed by decision-makers. A set of clear
priorities for implementation should be established that emphasize prudent and
tested actions and provide some early results. That
IMPLEMENTATION 151
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
course of action will help both the NBS and the NPBS to produce quickly the
kinds of results that are essential if they are to show their value to the nation.
Most of the recommendations in this chapter apply specifically to the NBS.
However, other members of the Partnership will need to be strongly involved in
various aspects of the fulfillment of the research and information needs described
in previous chapters, including many of those for which specific
recommendations are made here for the NBS.
STRATEGIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Recommendation 5-1: Development of the National Partnership and
National Biological Survey should be guided by a single Strategic
Implementation Plan developed under the leadership of the Department of
the Interior with the full participation of NPBS partners.
The plan should provide for a phased approach, including specific
milestones and priorities for implementation, in recognition that the effort will be
subject to both budget and personnel constraints. It should identify specific near-
term (immediately to within one year), intermediate (within 3 years), and longer-
term (within 5 years) priorities regarding personnel and administrative
management, research, inventory, and data management.
DOI should take the lead in development of the implementation plan,
because many of the steps will focus on the NBS. The plan should encompass the
entire scope of the Partnership and should be developed in conjunction with other
participants, through the proposed coordination mechanisms. The process for
development and coordination of the implementation plan should be used as an
opportunity to build a consensus among all the participants in the NPBS and to
establish priorities.
The plan should identify specific near-term actions that will provide early
results. It should also include mechanisms to ensure accountability among the
many participants in the Partnership.
IMPLEMENTATION 152
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Finally, it should incorporate a process for continuing assessment of the
work of the NPBS. The proposed coordination mechanisms should be used to
ensure accountability and assess the progress of implementation of the
Partnership.
The initial draft of the implementation plan should be developed and
released quickly for public comment, at least in outline form, if possible within 90
days after the establishment of a coordination mechanism. The plan should be
updated annually for at least the next 2 years.
IMPLEMENTATION PRIORITIES IN PERSONNEL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT
Near-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-2: The following issues should be addressed as
rapidly as possible so that the NBS can begin substantive work in the last
quarter of calendar 1993: appointment of key leaders, establishment of
coordination mechanisms, phased personnel transfers, and development of
an FY 1995 budget initiative for DOI, the National Science Foundation (NSF), and other agencies involved in the Partnership.
Provided below are more details related to this recommendation:
• Personnel appointments. The Secretary of the Interior should appoint
three key leaders for the NBS: the director, the chief scientist, and an
assistant director for data management. Until they are in place, effective
direction and planning of the NBS cannot begin.
• Coordination mechanisms. Appropriate steps should be taken to
implement mechanisms for coordination within the National
Partnership, described in Chapter 4.
• Phased personnel transfers. The proposed transfers of peo
IMPLEMENTATION 153
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ple to NBS programs from the existing bureaus of DOI should be phased
in over time and not implemented all at once as DOI currently plans. The
committee is concerned that the transfers might leave the other bureaus,
such as the Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Park Service,
without adequate scientific capabilities for them to carry out their
management responsibilities. Phased transfers would result in a more
orderly process and would provide a better opportunity to assess their
impacts on the management agencies.
It appears likely that Congress will appropriate funding to the NBS
for full transfers of personnel effective at the start of FY 1994.
However, the committee believes that the phased transfer process
referred to above can be implemented consistently with such an
appropriation. The bulk of the transfers would take place immediately.
The cost of personnel not transferred to the NBS in the initial phase
could be reimbursed through the NBS appropriations. Alternatively,
revisions to the current plans for personnel transfer could be
incorporated into a budget reprogramming.
• FY 1995 budget request. DOI, NSF, and other appropriate agencies
should develop initiatives for their FY 1995 budgets to obtain additional
funding needed to carry out recommendations in this report. The
committee recommends that the NBS FY 1995 budget be increased by
about the same percentage as in the DOI budget request for FY 1994.
We further recommend that NSF research programs related to the work
of the National Partnership, as described in Chapter 4, be assigned a high
priority for a budget increase, and that relevant programs in the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Forest Service, the
Smithsonian Institution, and the Environmental Protection Agency also
receive funding increases. The committee also recommends funding of
the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act to provide increased resources
for state wildlife programs concerned with native wildlife that are not
consumptively used (i.e., nongame programs). As discussed in Chapter 4,
the committee believes that these near-term budget increases are
necessary if the National Partnership is to be launched successfully.
IMPLEMENTATION 154
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Intermediate-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-3: During the first 3 years, broadening the mix of
scientific disciplines in the NBS and developing a multiyear authorization should have high priority.
• Broadening the mix of scientific disciplines in the NBS. In view of the
broad scientific needs of the NBS, the expertise of DOI scientists that
are expected to make up the initial staff is inadequate. All possible
sources of scientific expertise available in institutions, organizations, and
government agencies should be drawn to provide information. At the
same time, every effort should be made to enhance the capabilities of the
NBS by increasing the numbers and proportions of scientists with
expertise pertinent to the overall objectives of the NBS, rather than
merely attempting to build expertise by reassigning personnel. Key
subjects of expertise include taxonomy and systematics, ecology,
botany, population biology, invertebrate zoology, social sciences,
statistical design and analysis, and information sciences. In addition, it is
vital that each survey research unit have full capability in geographical
information system (GIS) technology. Such competence is not available
throughout the proposed network of NBS facilities.
• Multiyear authorization: The federal agencies involved in the National
Partnership should develop a multiyear strategy and budget for federal
NPBS programs as a means to ensure their effective coordination. In
addition to the National Biological Survey, other involved agencies
should seek multiyear legislative authorizations for their NPBS
programs beginning in FY 1996. A multiyear authorization would be an
important expression of legislative and executive support for the
National Partnership and could help to provide a measure of funding
stability and program continuity, although the programs would still be
subject to the standard appropriations process.
IMPLEMENTATION 155
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Long-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-4: Within 5 years, the NBS should develop a
strong capability in ecological analysis.
Over the longer term, the NBS should continue to add scientists who are
able to fill major gaps in biological knowledge, who have skills in the analysis of
ecological systems at all levels, and who are familiar with the geographic
locations in greatest need of evaluation vis-a-vis degree of conflict with human
activities. Evaluating existing and probable future human activities—whether
metropolitan growth, sustainable land use, or nonrenewable extraction—is
crucial to making a determination as to the potential ecological impact of such
activities.
IMPLEMENTATION PRIORITIES IN RESEARCH AND
INVENTORY PROGRAMS
The broad scope of the National Partnership requires an unprecedented
research and inventory effort to understand the nation's biological resources. The
overall objectives of NPBS systematic and ecological research and inventory
programs are to create a strong information base about the nation's biological
resources and to analyze the status and trends of those resources. To achieve
these objectives, major short-term program-planning decisions regarding research
and inventory activities must be made.
Near-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-5: During its first year, the NBS should give high
priority to assessing existing national biological
IMPLEMENTATION 156
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
databases and identifying priorities for additional information, assessing
collections, establishing a register of taxonomic specialists and identifying
gaps, developing a national research plan, and initiating regional
collaborative pilot projects.
These research priorities are described further below:
• Assessment of the existing national biological databases and
identification of priorities for additional information. Initiation of a
major effort to assess the whereabouts, availability, and quality of
existing data and expertise and development of a plan to fill key gaps.
• Assessment of collections. Initiation of a national assessment to identify
collection-holding institutions and the extent of their coverage. On the
basis of the assessment, a national strategy should be developed for new
survey and inventory work to fill gaps and for curation and maintenance
of the collections and their associated data.
• Register of taxonomic specialists. Establishment of a national register of
taxonomic specialists, identification of which high-priority groups lack
specialists, and institution of training or retraining programs to fill the
gaps in expertise.
• Research plan. Convening workshops of specialists to determine which
taxonomic groups and ecosystems meet criteria for intermediate-term,
near-term, or long-term attention; establishment of a national plan for
corresponding research; and evaluation of taxonomic groups,
communities, and ecosystems according to criteria recommended in
Chapter 2 with establishment of priorities and identification of
responsible parties. Research plans will be needed by both the NBS (for
DOI's needs) and the NPBS (for overall national needs).
• Regional collaborative pilot projects. Planning and initiation of pilot
projects (Recommendation 2-13) to study species biology, community
processes, and ecological interactions to determine which taxa,
ecosystems, and geographical areas warrant highest
IMPLEMENTATION 157
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
priority and use of the results to design larger-scale and long-term
studies. As with the research plans, these actions need to be taken by
both the NPS and other NPBS participants.
Intermediate-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-6: By its third year, the NBS should establish or
expand its research programs in environmental indicators and inventories of
areas rich in biological diversity, of unique ecosystems, and of potential
candidate areas for restoration, and it should develop a series of manuals,
monographs, and atlases and a system of ecological classifications based on
attributes.
• Environmental indicators. Expansion and intensification of research to
identify the most useful indicators of environmental trends.
• Inventories of areas rich in biodiversity. Initiation of activities for a
substantial number of biogeographic areas or habitats that have high
species richness or assemblages of unique species. Such areas might
include California, Hawaii, and Florida. These inventories would
provide resource managers and policy-makers a much better base of
information to guide future decisions on multiple-use management.
• Inventories of unique ecosystems. Thorough inventory of a small number
of communities and ecosystems that are unusually threatened so that
conservation plans can be developed before the situation is critical.
• Inventories to guide restoration. Inventory of a subset of the nation's
ecosystems (e.g., rivers) for the purpose of identifying ecosystems where
restoration efforts are likely to provide the greatest benefit for a
moderate cost.
IMPLEMENTATION 158
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Information services. Preparation of a series of manuals, monographs,
atlases, and field guides for the taxa and ecological units studied in both
print and electronic format.
• Ecosystem classifications. Definition of core ecosystem attributes and
development of functional ecosystem classification schemes.
Long-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-7: By its fifth year, the NBS should broaden its scientific priorities to include research efforts in restoration biology and
expanded inventories, should develop models to predict the status and trends
of ecological systems, and should work to fill remaining gaps.
• Restoration biology. An expanded program of research in restoration
biology.
• Expanded inventories. Gradual expansion of the inventory of the nation's
biodiversity to less well-known groups.
• Development of predictive models. Broadening programs to ascertain the
power of data to predict the status and trends of ecosystems and species
so as to anticipate species declines and community perturbations
resulting from human activities. In addition, modeling efforts should
seek to develop methods for applying the knowledge gained from model
systems to a broad range of habitats. The completion of DOI's terrestrial
Gap Analysis Program and the initiation of aquatic gap analysis are
important steps in the development of such models.
• Filling gaps. Broadening of research programs to initiate research on
neglected species, populations, communities, and ecosystems that are
judged to be of special importance for scientific, economic, recreational,
or cultural reasons.
IMPLEMENTATION 159
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
IMPLEMENTATION PRIORITIES IN DATA MANAGEMENT
At a 1985 symposium on the need for a national biological survey (Kim and
Knutson, 1986), those in attendance agreed that massive computerized data
collection was essential. Computerized databases on the nation's ecosystems and
biota are vital components of the NPBS. A program that did not involve an
extensive, easy-to-use, computerized data network would be unable to accomplish
its goals.
Near-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-8: During its first year, the National Partnership, under the lead of the NBS, should develop a strategic plan for information
management, and the NBS should establish a data-management office headed by a senior official.
• Plan for information management. Development of a strategic plan for
information management should be developed as part of the overall
NPBS implementation plan. The plan should identify the user groups to
be served, the functions to be provided, and the kinds of products needed
to meet user needs. The plan should also document and evaluate
relevant activities and information resources that are pertinent to the
NPBS. DOI should take the lead in this effort, with the initial focus of
information management being within the NBS. However, the plan
should encompass all data-management activities of the Partnership, and
all its participants should be involved. Oversight and assessment of the
implementation of the strategic plan should be performed through the
proposed coordination mechanisms.
• Data-management organization. Establishment of a separate data-
management office at the NBS headed by a senior-level official
(assistant director or higher). The office should be
IMPLEMENTATION 160
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
provided with personnel and equipment dedicated to distributing
regional and national NBS data sets and supporting NBS activities.
Intermediate-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-9: By its third year, the National Partnership, under
the leadership of NBS, should establish the foundations of a networked,
distributed, National Biotic Resource Information System.
Because the essential data on biological resources are maintained in a variety
of private, local, state, and federal sources, the development of a national network
of distributed databases is a critical objective. The NBS should take the lead in
developing a national data network by
• Establishing a moderate-sized data management facility, the primary
mission of which is to manage NBST data, but which will also include a
directory service to help NPBS users locate and/or access information
available through the national network.
• Identification of appropriate linkages with other database sources.
• Coordination of a series of workshops involving potential contributors
and cooperators in the network to coordinate and standardize collection
and management of data.
• Major expansion of online access to biological-resource data and
expediting of creative use of Internet, user interfaces, and graphical
communication.
• Support of existing private, local, and state efforts to develop regional
and statewide databases.
• Detailed study of several model systems as pilot projects to evaluate
approaches to data collection, interpretation, and application.
• Active cooperation with federal interagency initiatives to coordinate and
manage data on biological resources.
IMPLEMENTATION 161
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Moderate expansion of the database facility and staffing to handle the
increased activities.
• Substantial increase in the NBS capabilities for publication and
electronic communication.
The data management facility should focus on archiving and distributing
data sets and meeting the goals of DOI's proposed National Biological Status and
Trends program.
Long-Term Priorities
Recommendation 5-10: By its fifth year, NPBS should develop
programs to deploy new information technology, expand its publication
capabilities, and evaluate its data-management programs.
• Deployment of new information technology. Implementation of a
continuing program to use newly discovered and enhanced information
technologies in data collection, management, and dissemination.
• Expansion of publication capability. Increased online access to
information and publication of related data sets, atlases, and summaries.
• Program evaluation. NBS leadership in developing the capability to
evaluate the success of completed and continuing studies and to design
new ones. Overall evaluation and assessment of data-management
activities should be accomplished through the proposed mechanisms for
coordination.
SUMMARY
This chapter has discussed the steps needed to implement the actions in this
report. The first key step is the development of a single strategic implementation
plan that would guide the develop
IMPLEMENTATION 162
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ment of the National Partnership for Biological Survey and National Biological
Survey. This plan should be developed under the leadership of DOI and with the
full participation of NPBS partners.
As part of this plan, priorities need to be set. The following list summarizes
all the near-term, intermediate-term, and long-term priorities noted in this
chapter.
Near-Term Priorities (Immediately to within 1 Year)
NBS
• Appoint key leaders
• Phase in personnel transfers
• Assess existing national biological databases
• Identify priorities for additional information
• Assess collections
• Establish register of taxonomic specialist
• Develop national research plan
• Initiate regional collaborative pilot projects
• Establish data-management office headed by senior official
NPBS
• Establish national coordination mechanisms
• Develop FY 1995 budget initiative for DOI, NSF, and other agencies
involved
• Develop strategic plan for information management
• Develop national research plan
• Initiate regional collaborative pilot projects
IMPLEMENTATION 163
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Intermediate-Term Priorities (within 3 Years)
NBS
• Broaden mix of scientific disciplines
• Establish or expand research programs in environmental indicators
• Establish or expand research programs in inventories of areas rich in
biological diversity, unique ecosystems, and potential candidate areas
for restoration
• Develop series of manuals, monographs and atlases and system of
ecological classifications based on attributes
• Establish moderate-size data-management facility
NPBS
• Develop multiyear authorization
• Establish national data network
Long-Term Priorities (within 5 Years)
NBS
• Develop strong capability in ecological analysis
• Broaden scientific priorities to include research efforts in restoration
biology
• Expand inventories
• Develop predictive models
• Fill information gaps
IMPLEMENTATION 164
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
NPBS
• Develop programs to deploy new information technology
• Evaluate data-management programs.
Although priorities might change over time, the committee believes that
phasing the steps outlined above according to a well-planned strategy will lead to a
successful NBS and National Partnership. If a clear strategy is not developed, it is
likely that the results will fall short of providing the effective and credible
scientific information needed by decision-makers. Establishing the priorities
outlined here will help both the NBS and the NPBS to provide quickly the kinds
of results that are essential if they are to show their value to the nation.
IMPLEMENTATION 165
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
IMPLEMENTATION 166
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
REFERENCES
Arnolds, E. 1988. The changing macromycete flora in The Netherland. Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc.
903:391-406.
Arnolds, E. 1991. Decline of ectomycorrhizal fungi in Europe. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 35:209-244.
ASC (Association of Systematics Collections). 1993. An Information Model for Biological
Collections. Draft report of the Biological Collections Data Standards Workshop, Cornell
University, Ithaca, N.Y., Aug. 18-24, 1992. Association of Systematics Collections,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kan.
Bolton, M.P., ed. 1991. Vegetation from Mapping to Decision Support. Environmental Resources
Information Network. Canberra, Australia: Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service.
61 pp.
Bourgeon, P.S. 1988. Advantages and limitations of ecological classification for the protection of
ecosystems. Conserv. Biol. 2:218-220.
Bowser, C.J. 1986. Historic data sets: Lessons from the past, lessons for the future. Pp. 155-179 in
Research Data Manage
REFERENCES 167
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ment in the Ecological Sciences, W.K. Michener, ed. Columbia, S.C.: University of South
Carolina Press.
Carson, R. 1962. Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Colwell, R.R. 1983. Biotechnology in the marine sciences. Science 222:19-23.
di Castri, F., J.R. Verhnes, and T. Younes. 1992. Inventorying and Monitoring Biodiversity. Report
SI-27. Paris: UNESCO. 28 pp.
Dodd, K.C., Jr. 1991. The status of the Red Hills salamander, Phaeognathus hubrichti, Alabama,
USA, 1976-1988. Biol. Conserv. 55:57-75.
Falk, D.A. 1991. Joining biological and economic models for conserving plant genetic diversity. Pp.
209-223 in Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants, D.A. Falk and K.E. Holfinger, eds.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Falk, D.A., and K.E. Holsinger, eds. 1991. The Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. New York:
Oxford University Press. 283 pp.
Georghiou, G.P. 1972. The evolution of resistance to pesticides. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 3:133-168.
Gross, M.R. 1991. Salmon breeding behavior and life history evolution in changing environments.
Ecology 72(2):1180-1186.
Gulden, G., K. Hoiland, K. Bendiksen, T.E. Brandrud, B.S. Foss, H.B. Jenssen, and D. Laber. 1992.
Macromycetes and air pollution. Mycoenological studies in three oligotrophic spruce forests
in Europe. Bibliotheca Mycologica Band 144. Berlin: J. Cramer. 81 pp.
Hawksworth, D.L., and J.M. Ritchie. 1993. Biodiversity and Biosystematic Priorities:
Microorganisms and Invertebrates. Wallingford, U.K.: CAB International. 120 pp.
Hollander, A.D., F.W. Davis, and D. Stoms. In press. Hierarchical representation of species
distributions using map, image, and sighting data . In Mapping the Diversity of Nature, R.I.
Miller, ed. London: Chapman & Hall.
Holling, C.S., ed. 1978. Adaptive Environmental Assessment
REFERENCES 168
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and Management. London: John Wiley & Sons. 377 pp.
Interior Geographic Data Committee. 1992. Coordination of Spatial Data Activities in the
Department of Interior. Interior Geographic Data Committee Annual Report, December
1992. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior. 7 pp.
Jackson, J.B.C. 1992. Pleistocene perspectives on coral reef community structure. Am. Zool.
32:719-731.
Karr, J.R. 1987. Biological monitoring and environmental assessment: A conceptual framework.
Environ. Manage. 11(2):249-256.
Kim, K.C., and L. Knutson, eds. 1986. Foundations for a National Biological Survey. Lawrence,
Kan.: Association of Systematics Collections.
Lessios, H.A. 1988. Mass mortality of Diadema antillarum in the Caribbean: What have we learned?
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 19:371-393.
Levin, S. 1993. The problem of pattern and scale in ecology. Ecology 73:1943-1967.
Magnuson, J. 1989. Loss of Biological Diversity: A Global Crisis Requiring International Solutions.
Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.
Marshall, L.G. 1985. Geochronology and land-mammal bio-chronology of the transamerican faunal
interchange. Pp. 49-85 in The Great American Biotic Interchange, F.G. Stehli and S.D.
Webb, eds. New York: Plenum Press.
Mooney, H.A., and J.A. Drake, eds. 1986. The Ecology of Biological Invasions of North America and
Hawaii. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
National Audubon Society. 1992. Report of the Advisory Panel on the Everglades and Endangered
Species. New York: National Audubon Society. 43 pp.
Nature Conservancy of Hawaii, Natural Resources Defense Council. 1992. The Alien Species
Invasion in Hawaii: Background Study and Recommendations for Interagency Planning.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Honolulu.
REFERENCES 169
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Nixon, K.C., and Q.D. Wheeler. 1992. Measures of phylogenetic diversity. Pp. 216-234 in Extinction
and Phylogeny, M.J. Novacek and Q.D. Wheeler, eds. New York: Columbia University
Press.
NRC (National Research Council). 1986. Ecological Knowledge and Environmental Problem-
Solving: Concepts and Case Studies. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 388 pp.
NRC (National Research Council). 1990. Forestry Research: A Mandate for Change. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press. 84 pp.
NRC (National Research Council). 1992. Restoration of Aquatic Ecosystems: Science, Technology,
and Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 552 pp.
NRC (National Research Council). 1993a. Toward a Coordinated Spatial Data Infrastructure.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 171 pp.
NRC (National Research Council). 1993b. Research to Protect, Restore, and Manage the
Environment. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 242 pp.
NSF (National Science Foundation). 1992. The U.S. Global Change Data and Information
Management Program Plan. Report by the Committee on Earth and Environmental
Sciences. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation. 94 pp.
Orians, G.H. 1993. Endangered at what level? Ecol. Appl. 32:206-208.
Prescott-Allen, R., and C. Prescott-Allen. 1990. How many plants feed the world? Conserv. Biol.
4:365-374.
Ray, G.C. 1988. Ecological diversity in coastal zones and oceans. Pp. 36-50 in Biodiversity, E.O.
Wilson, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Reid, W.V., S.A. Laird, C.A. Meyer, R. Gamez, A. Sittenfeld, D.H. Janzen, M.A. Gollin, and C.
Juma. 1993. Biodiversity Prospecting. Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute. 324
pp.
REFERENCES 170
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Stein, B. 1992. Toward Common Goals: Collections Information in Conservation Data Bases. Paper
presented at the Workshop on Data Sharing and Data Base Ethics sponsored by the
Association of Systematics Collections, Honolulu, Aug. 10, 1992.
Terborgh, J. 1989. Where Have All the Birds Gone? Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Thorne-Miller, B., and J. Catena. 1991. The Living Ocean. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Vane-Wright, R.I., C.J. Humphries, and P.H. Williams. 1991. What to protect? Systematics and the
agony of choice. Biol. Conserv. 55:235-254.
Walters, C.J. 1986. Adaptive Management of Renewable Resources. New York: Macmillan.
Wheeler, Q.D. 1990. Insect diversity and cladistic constraints. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am.
83:1031-1047.
Williams, J.D., M.L. Warren, Jr., K.S. Cummings, J.L. Harris, and R.J. Neves. 1993. Conservation
status of freshwater mussels of the United States and Canada. Fisheries 18:6-23.
Wilson, E.O. 1992. The Diversity of Life. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press/Harvard University
Press. 424 pp.
Yoon, C.K. 1993. Counting creatures great and small. Science 260:620-622.
Zeiner, D.C., W.F. Laudenslayer, K.E. Meyer, and M. White. 1990. California's Wildlife.
Sacramento, Calif.: California Department of Fish and Game. 3 vols.
REFERENCES 171
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
REFERENCES 172
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
APPENDIX A:
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION ON
COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND
PROFESSIONAL STAFF
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Peter H. Raven (Chair) is director of the Missouri Botanical Garden and
Engelmann Professor of Botany of Washington University. He received his
Ph.D. from the University of California, Los Angeles in 1960. He is home
secretary of the National Academy of Sciences and member of the National
Science Board. He holds honorary degrees from several universities, is a member
of several foreign academies of sciences, and has received numerous
international honors and awards, including the International Prize for Biology
from the government of Japan, the Prize for Environment of the Institute de la
Vie in Paris, and the Volvo Environment Prize.
Michael J. Bean is chair of the Environmental Defense Fund's Wildlife
Program where since 1977 he has been a principal strategist in legislative efforts
to strengthen protection for en
APPENDIX A: 173
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
dangered species, other wildlife, and wildlife habitats. He serves on the boards of
the Environmental Law Institute and the Xerxes Society and is the recipient of
numerous awards, including the Society for Conservation Biology's Distinguished
Achievement Award. His publications range from The Evolution of National
Wildlife Law, which is generally regarded as the leading reference on wildlife
conservation law, to articles for scientific, popular, and legal periodicals. He is a
1973 graduate of Yale Law School.
Frank W. Davis is an associate professor of geography at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. He received his Ph.D. from The Johns Hopkins
University Department of Geography and Environmental Engineering in 1983.
Currently, he is principal investigator of the California Gap Analysis project, a
participant in IBM's Environmental Research Program, and a member of the
editorial board of Conservation Biology .
Gordon P. Easton is director of the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University. Previously, he was president of Iowa State University for
four and one-half years. Dr. Eaton received his Ph.D. at the California Institute of
Technology. In 1963, he joined the U.S. Geological Survey and he became the
associate chief geologist in 1978. His honors include the U.S. Government Senior
Executive Performance Award.
Sharon G. Haines is manager, natural resources, International Paper. She
received her Ph.D. in forestry and soil science from North Carolina State
University in 1977. She is the Chair of the Forest Science and Technology Board
of the Society of American Foresters and a former associate editor of Soil Science
Society of America Journal and Southern Journal of Applied Forestry.
Joseph Hezir is executive vice president of the EOP Foundation, Inc. He
also is the managing partner of the EOP Group, Inc., a consulting firm that
specializes in regulatory-strategy development and problem-solving. Mr. Hezir
served for 18 years in the White House Office of Management and Budget
(OMB).
APPENDIX A: 174
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
From 1986 to 1992, he served as the OMB deputy associate director for
energy and science, with oversight responsibility for the budgetary, regulatory,
legislative, and policy-development activities of a number of federal agencies.
Jeremy B.C. Jackson is a senior scientist at the Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute (STRI) in the Republic of Panama, where he is director of the
Center for Tropical Paleoecology and Archaeology. He received his Ph.D. from
Yale University in 1971, and was professor of ecology at The Johns Hopkins
University before moving to STRI in 1984. His current research includes
historical patterns of diversity and extinction in tropical America in relation to the
formation of the Isthmus of Panama and the ecology and conservation of tropical
coastal communities.
Christopher B. Leinberger is managing director of Robert Charles Lesser
& Co., the largest independent real-estate advisory firm in North America. He
specializes in metropolitan development trends and strategic planning for cities
and real-estate companies. He is a graduate of Swarthmore College in urban
sociology and Harvard Business School in strategic planning. He also attended
the University of Michigan's Survey Research Center and the Martin Luther King
School of Social Change and was a Coro fellow in Los Angeles.
Judith L. Meyer is professor of ecology at the University of Georgia,
Athens. She received her Ph.D. in ecology and evolutionary biology from
Cornell University in 1978. Her research interests are in the field of aquatic
ecology with a focus on stream ecosystems, microbial food webs, and land-water
interactions. She is president-elect of the Ecological Society of America.
William Molini is director of the Nevada Department of Wildlife, having
been appointed in 1982. He received his education from Utah State University in
wildlife management. He served as president of the International Association of
Fish and Wildlife Agencies in 1989-1990 and of the Western Association of Fish
and Wildlife Agencies in 1982. Among his awards are the
APPENDIX A: 175
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Conservation/Service Citation from the National Wildlife Federation and the
President's Public Service Award from The Nature Conservancy.
Nancy R. Morin is assistant director of the Missouri Botanical Garden and
convening editor for Flora of North America. She received her Ph.D. from the
University of California, Berkeley in 1980. She is an adjunct professor of botany
at Washington University and the University of Missouri St. Louis. She serves on
the editorial committee for the Flora of China and on the council of the
International Organization for Plant Information.
Lorin I. Nevling, Jr. is chief of the Illinois Natural History Survey in the
Illinois Department of Energy and Natural Resources and Affiliate of the
Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana. He
received his Ph.D. from Washington University in 1959. He has served at the
Arnold Arboretum, Gray Herbarium, Farlow Herbarium, and Library of
Cryptogamic Botany, all of Harvard University, and at the Field Museum of
Natural History.
Gordon H. Orians is professor of zoology and environmental studies at the
University of Washington, Seattle and formerly directed the Institute for
Environmental Studies there. He is an ecologist and environmental scientist who
conducts research on the evolution of vertebrate social systems, the structure of
ecological communities, plant-herbivore interactions, the ecology of rare species,
and environmental aesthetics. He is a member of the National Academy of
Sciences.
Paul G. Risser is president of Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, where he
also holds the rank of professor of botany. He received his Ph.D. from the
University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1967. He chairs the Board On
Environmental Studies and Toxicology of the National Research Council. He is
past president of the American Institute of Biological Sciences and the
Ecological Society of America.
Robert J. Robbins is associate professor of medical infor
APPENDIX A: 176
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
mation and director of the Applied Research Laboratory at the William H. Welch
Medical Library of The Johns Hopkins University and director of the Informatics
Core of the Genome Data Base. He received his Ph.D. from Michigan State
University in 1977. Before going to Johns Hopkins in 1991, he served as program
director for database activities in the biological, behavioral, and social sciences at
the National Science Foundation. He serves on the advisory boards of several
biological databases and on the Human Genome Coordinating Committee for the
Department of Energy.
Jay M. Savage is professor of biology at the University of Miami in Coral
Gables. He received his Ph.D. from Stanford University in 1955. His research has
concentrated on the evolutionary and historical determinants of the distribution of
vertebrates, their ecologic role in tropical forests and biogeographic theory. In
1963 he was instrumental in founding the Organization for Tropical Studies
(OTS) which is now a consortium of 55 U.S. and Latin American institutions
devoted to graduate education, research and conservation in the tropics, and has a
central office and field stations in Costa Rica; he served as its president in
1974-1980.
Rollin D. Sparrowe received a Ph.D. in wildlife ecology from Michigan
State University in 1969. He is Vice-president of the Wildlife Management
Institute, in Washington, D.C. Previously, he served with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service as chief of the Division of Cooperative Research Units, chief of
the Division of Wildlife Research, chief of the Office of Migratory Bird
Management, and deputy assistant director for refuges and wildlife. Dr. Sparrowe
is president-elect of The Wildlife Society, a member of the Society for
Conservation Biology, and a professional member of the Boone and Crockett
Club. He has received a number of awards for outstanding service, including the
U.S. Department of the Interior's Superior Service Award and the Meritorious
Service Award.
Victoria J. Tschinkel is a senior consultant for environmen
APPENDIX A: 177
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tal issues with the law firm of Landers and Parsons in Tallahassee, Florida. She
was secretary of the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation in
1981-1987 and was involved in the development of major environmental
legislation. She is a member of the boards of directors of numerous private and
public organizations, including Resources for the Future, the Environmental and
Energy Study Institute, the National Commission on the Environment, the
German Marshall Fund of the United States, and Phillips Petroleum Company.
She also chairs the advisory council of the Gas Research Institute.
Quentin D. Wheeler is chair and associate professor of insect taxonomy of
the Department of Entomology, Cornell University. He received his Ph.D. from
the Ohio State University in 1980. He is a research associate of the American
Museum of Natural History, New York City. He is vice president of the
Association of Systematics Collections, vice president of the International Willi
Hennig Society, and past president of the Coleopterists Society.
PROFESSIONAL STAFF
Eric A. Fischer is project director of the Committee on the Formation of the
National Biological Survey and director of the Board on Biology and the Institute
of Laboratory Animal Resources of the National Research Council. He received
his Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley in 1979. As an American
Association for the Advancement of Science Congressional Science Fellow, he
worked on federal science policy and science education for the U.S. Senate
Budget Committee. He became deputy director of the Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute in Panama, and then senior vice president for science and
sanctuaries at the National Audubon Society, before coming to the Research
Council.
APPENDIX A: 178
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Deborah D. Stine is a senior program officer for the Committee on the
Formation of a National Biological Survey, project director for a National
Academy of Engineering workshop on corporate environmental responsibility,
and study director of the Committee on Risk Assessment of Hazardous Air
Pollutants. At the National Research Council since 1989, Dr. Stine previously
served as staff officer of the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public
Policy's Panel on Policy Implications of Greenhouse Warming, focusing on the
mitigation of greenhouse-gas emissions. Her specialties are environmental
engineering, policy analysis, and decision-making.
APPENDIX A: 179
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
APPENDIX A: 180
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
APPENDIX B:
NATIONAL BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
FISCAL YEAR 1994 BUDGET
JUSTIFICATION
The task of this committee is not to undertake an evaluation of the details of
the Department of the Interior's proposal for the National Biological Survey.
Nonetheless, the reader may find it useful to see key parts of this proposal. Thus,
this appendix contains excerpts of the DOI's FY 1994 budget justification to
Congress that describes the mission and organization that DOI has proposed for
the National Biological Survey.
GENERAL STATEMENT
Overview
''The National Biological Survey will produce the map we need to avoid
the economic and environmental 'train wrecks' we see scattered across the
country. NBS will
APPENDIX B: 181
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
provide the scientific knowledge America needs to balance the compatible goals of ecosystem protection and economic progress. Just as the U.S.
Geological Survey gave us an understanding of America's geography in
1879, the National Biological Survey will unlock information about how we
protect ecosystems and plan for the future.''
Bruce Babbitt
Secretary of the Interior
Perhaps no other function at the Department of the Interior is as critical to
natural resource decision-making as is science. In a world marked by growing
demands for natural resources and increasing complexity and competition, it is
imperative that sound and comprehensive science provide the basis for informed
and timely answers. This is particularly true in the area of biological science
where our awareness of man's impact upon the diversity and interdependence of
life grows daily.
In recent years, the need for broader and more timely biological information
has been readily apparent in the numerous controversies and potential economic
dislocations surrounding endangered species decisions. Unfortunately, the
scientific information being provided often appears only after the crisis has
emerged, not before, when there is still time to act effectively.
The creation of the National Biological Survey (NBS) as a freestanding
bureau within the Department of the Interior is aimed at filling the vacuum that
currently exists for broad scale biological information and assessments of the
Nation's natural resources. Science, in the context of the NBS, includes
traditional research (including that carried out in cooperation with state agencies
and universities) as well as inventorying and monitoring to identify status and
trends, and information transfer.
The Department proposes to establish the NBS by combining substantial
portions of the biological research and survey activities of three Departmental
bureaus — the U. S. Fish and Wildlife
APPENDIX B: 182
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Service (FWS), the National Park Service (NPS), the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM)-and smaller research activities from five other
Departmental bureaus-the Minerals Management Service (MMS), the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM), the Bureau of
Reclamation (BOR), the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and the Bureau of
Mines (BOM). Organizationally, the NBS will report to the Assistant Secretary
for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.
The NBS will 1) perform research in support of biological resource
management; 2) inventory, monitor, and report on the status and trends in the
Nation's biotic resources, and 3) develop the ability and resources to transfer the
information gained in research and monitoring to resource managers and to others
concerned with the care, use, and conservation of the Nation's natural resources.
The Department is proposing to establish a new bureau to:
• Develop an anticipatory, proactive biological science program that will
enable land and resource managers at federal, state, and local levels to
develop comprehensive ecosystem management strategies and respond
to resource issues in a timely and efficient manner. This will maximize
opportunities for constructive cooperation between economic
development and resource conservation interests, thus reducing costs and
avoiding unnecessary conflicts.
• Enable Departmental managers to target resources so as to respond to the
most critical national biological resource concerns while ensuring that
local concerns are also addressed.
• Establish national leadership and focus for the Department's biological
science program, enhancing its credibility and providing a greater
incentive for natural resource managers and others to rely upon
scientifically generated data and conclusions.
• Reduce overlap and duplication among the biological research, inventory
and monitoring, and information transfer efforts
APPENDIX B: 183
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
of the bureaus within the Department, and improve the quality and
productivity of the Department's overall biological science efforts.
• Give land and resource managers within the Department more timely,
objective scientific information essential for decision-making and for
structuring more effective partnerships with federal, state and local
entities.
Mission and Activities
The mission of the NBS will be to gather, analyze and disseminate the
information necessary for the wise stewardship of our Nation's natural resources,
and to foster an understanding of our biological systems and the benefits they
provide to society. The NBS will act as an independent science bureau, without
advocating positions on resource management issues and without regulatory or
land and water development authorities.
The NBS will support the appropriate management of land and living
resources by, 1) providing information on the abundance, distribution and health
of biological resources, through a coordinated, inventory and monitoring program
for plants, animals and ecosystems, that will produce a biennial report on status
and trends in the Nation's biological resources; 2) furthering the understanding of
the functioning of biological systems, their relationships with other resources and
their responses to human and environmental stress, through a research program
organized around species, population and ecosystem research; and 3)
communicating the results of both inventory, research, and technology and
methods development, through a state-of-the-art technology development and
information transfer element. The NBS will build on existing capabilities within
the Department, and will augment them with special emphasis on improved,
statistically significant, comprehensive status and trends, and expanded effort on
ecosystem and landscape levels of research.
NBS's activities will be fully responsive to the management and
APPENDIX B: 184
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
information needs of Interior bureaus, and will be closely coordinated with other
federal agencies, state and local governments, the private sector, and
nongovernmental organizations. Several means will be used to ensure that NBS
will meet the needs of Departmental and other research users. It will hold
meetings of resource managers, research customers, and research managers in
each ecoregion at least annually, to help identify resource trends and research
needs and priorities; it will also use a policy board and a science council, to
include representatives of Departmental resource management bureaus and
external science interests (state, federal, and academic), respectively, to advise on
national trends and needs. The NBS will formalize the needs and services to be
provided through Memoranda of Understanding negotiated with each bureau.
Finally, NBS will maintain the presence of its scientists in resource managers'
facilities, to emphasize through physical proximity the objective of continuing a
close working relationship with the customer. The goal is to make the change in
organization a transparent one, with no obstacles to meeting resource managers'
needs while improving the level and quality of support.
NBS will serve the land and resource managers' and policymakers' needs for
information on the structure, functioning and responses of biological resources
and systems under the management of the Department's bureaus, to enable them
to better fulfill their missions. Building on the existing network of relationships,
NBS will focus on a broad array of biological information and research needs,
from the national and regional levels, through ecosystem and landscape levels, to
local and site-specific needs. The research will be both basic as well as problem
and issue oriented. NBS will provide the best available, timely information
necessary for Department bureaus to make policy and natural resource
management decisions at the local level. NBS will also serve, on a reimbursable
basis, the needs of other federal and state agencies, local governments, and other
entities.
NBS will expand existing inventory activities to produce a coordinated
inventory and monitoring program yielding statistical
APPENDIX B: 185
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ly significant results on the status and trends in abundance, health and distribution
of plants, animals, and ecosystems. This will include efforts to identify declines
in, or degradation of, ecosystems and their component species and populations
prior to the time they are reduced to critical levels demanding severe protection.
The inventory program will be conducted in concert with other federal agencies,
state agencies, State Heritage Programs, nongovernmental organizations, and
academia.
A program for technical development and information and technology
transfer will provide managers with tools and information to help interpret and
apply biological information in order to better manage natural resources. It will
involve: (1) development, modification and adaptation of emerging technologies,
(2) development of predictive models based on the research data, for use by
managers, (3) development and improvement of techniques, methods and
protocols for gathering, synthesizing, analyzing and storing data, and (4) a
program to transfer and encourage the effective use of information and
technologies by bureau policymakers and natural resource managers.
Cooperative research units remain an important element of NBS's approach.
These units will provide scientists and education to help meet local, site-specific,
and specialized research needs of the Department, other federal and state
agencies. Through existing units, state natural resource agencies already have an
established, effective partnership with the federal research capability of the
Department. Cooperative research efforts have provided professional graduate
education, technical assistance, and resource management information for state
and federal resource management agencies at significantly lower costs than each
could have provided for themselves.
NBS Headquarters and Field Organization
The programs and functions of the NBS will be carried out through the
following major organizational components:
APPENDIX B: 186
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Headquarters Office
Consists of the Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Directors, and the staff
offices and divisions reporting to them (see organizational chart) and provides
national policy formulation and program direction for each of the programs
implemented under the NBS research, inventory, and information transfer. The
Headquarters office directly supervises research and inventory activities that are
national in scope. The Headquarters office receives guidance from a Policy Board
which consists of Interior bureau representatives, and a Science Council which is
made up of representatives from the federal, state, nongovernmental, and
academic biological science community. The Science Council assists in
improving coordination with entities outside of the Department of the Interior and
ensuring that NBS's agenda fully reflects national concerns. The Headquarters
office maintains contacts with Departmental and bureau offices, the Office of
Management and Budget, the Office of Personnel Management, Congress, other
federal and state agencies, national organizations, the media and members of the
public; and provides central administrative direction and procedures for NBS
activities.
Ecoregional Centers
Each Center is headed by an Assistant Director, and has overall
responsibility for providing line management, procedural and operational
guidance for all NBS activities-except national programs-within the region under
its jurisdiction. Centers also have responsibility for national program policy
development and support for delegated program areas under their jurisdiction, for
coordination and communication with local managers and other research
customers within their jurisdictions, for providing delegated technical and
administrative support functions within their jurisdictions, and for supervising the
activities conducted by Research Centers, Cooperative Research Units, and other
Region
APPENDIX B: 187
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
al research scientists. There are 4 Ecoregional Centers, located in Leetown, WV;
Lafayette, LA; Ft. Collins, CO; and Seattle, WA. (See map, page 6, for regions
and associated centers.)
Research Centers
Each headed by a Center Director, have responsibility for directing and
conducting large scale regional research, monitoring, and information transfer
activities within their specialty areas of jurisdiction; for coordination with and
support to resource managers and other research customers; for providing
administrative support as delegated; and for supervising Field Stations for whom
they have jurisdiction. There are a total of 12 Research Centers and 40 Field
Stations.
Cooperative Units
Each headed by a Unit Leader, have responsibility for conducting research,
graduate-level education, and technical assistance activities in support of Interior
bureaus, other federal and state agencies, and universities. Their activities are
most often local, regional, or statewide in nature, but they may address larger
scale issues as special expertise is needed. Acting in concert, they can also
provide a nationwide network of research stations. There are a total of 72
Cooperative Units.
Inventory and Monitoring Activities
The Assistant Director for Inventory and Monitoring will direct national
efforts for the status and trends, and establish policy, standards, and protocols for a
coordinated inventory and monitoring program at the local and regional level.
Activities will include efforts to inventory the abundance, distribution, and health
APPENDIX B: 188
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
of indicator plants, animals, and ecosystems. Standardized protocols will be
established in cooperation with other agencies to enhance comparability of
methods. It will include existing inventory programs, including the National
Wetlands Inventory, Gap Analysis Program, Biomonitoring of Environmental
Status and Trends, and other new components.
Information Transfer
The Assistant Director for Information Transfer will direct activities related
to management and storage of data within the NBS as well as the transfer of
scientific information to research customers. These activities include the
development of scientific publications, databases, and syntheses of information
generated by research and inventory and monitoring programs.
Bureauwide Support Offices
The Geographic Information System Technical Center, located at Denver,
Colorado, and headed by the Technical Center Director, provides bureauwide
technical, scientific, data management and administrative services. It will
maintain field stations for local and regional support in Onalaska, Wisconsin, and
other locations in the future.
Only those resources necessary to accomplish the basic mission of NBS will
be transferred to NBS. Researchers and support staff will move to NBS if they are
involved in formation and testing of hypotheses, whether laboratory or field-
based; basic or applied and mission oriented, research on subjects such as
systematics, population dynamics, physiology, behavior, ecology, habitats,
biodiversity, and ecosystem processes and functions; and national inventories or
those of national significance. Staff involved in applying biological information
to management decisions will not
APPENDIX B: 189
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
be transferred. For example, the Department's existing organizations will continue
to decide whether 1) to list a species under the Endangered Species Act, 2)
determine appropriate grazing levels on a specific land parcel, and 3) evaluate
alternative road alignments. Most biologists in the Department will not be
transferred to NBS. The majority of the Department's biologists are involved in
the application of biological information to decisions, rather than in research and
major inventory efforts, and will remain in the resource management bureaus.
Inventory and monitoring activities to be transferred to NBS will include
those national and regional level efforts that are necessary for, and can contribute
to, a comprehensive national picture of the abundance, distribution, and health of
biological resources. Purely local efforts will not be transferred but, rather, will
be supported by the technology development and standardization efforts of NBS.
The NBS will provide a variety of benefits. It will:
• Provide a national focus and leadership for quality inventory and
monitoring, biological research, technology development and transfer,
and cooperative biological research.
• Ensure that science remains independent from management's application
of science. This separation of functions will enhance the integrity and
objectivity of scientific results.
• Consolidate many separate, overlapping functions into one organization,
enhancing overall productivity and capability, avoiding duplication, and
taking advantage of economies of scale.
• Expand the research information and technical support available to all
clients.
• Provide a clear statement about the importance of quality, professional
science.
• Provide the opportunity for proactive, anticipatory research that will help
avoid future "train wrecks".
APPENDIX B: 190
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
APPENDIX B: 191
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
NATIONAL BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
Ecocenters
APPENDIX B: 192
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Index
A
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadel-
phia, 38
American Museum of Natural History, 38
American Type Culture Collection, 71
Army Corps of Engineers, 36, 78, 148
Arthropods, 70, 71
Audubon Societies, 42
Australia
biodiversity organizations, 65
Environmental Resources Information
Network, 97
B
Bacteria, 69, 71
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
Biological assessment
development of protocols, 79
Biological data and information, 54, 121
access for researchers, 95
benefits, 53
dispersed locations, 57, 115, 161
needs, 94
online access, 161
organization, 97
public needs, 95
sources, 106
use by decision-makers, 93, 95, 97
use by public/private organizations, 55,
95
Biological diversity
data management, 104
INDEX 193
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
decline, 65
development of a data model, 105
difficulties in minimizing threats, 44
inventories of rich areas, 158
maintenance and enhancement, 61
prospecting, 47, 48
Biological indicators
ecological trends, 87
importance, 87
monitoring and assessment, 87
standards, 87
Biological resources, 31, 59, 61
anticipation of conflicts, 56
assessment, 28
challenging issues, 56
decision-making, 31, 54
definition, 26
detecting trends, 80
distribution, 57
dynamics, 52
effects of climate change, 85
effects of suburbanization, 65
esthetic experiences, 46
evaluation, 61
identifying changes, 80
improved management of, 54
information base for decisions, 57
information needs, 84
information flow, 111
inventorying and monitoring, 55
management, 29, 49, 50, 52, 54, 72, 90
management and preservation, 133
national and international networks, 39
objectives for assessment, 64
products of practical value, 121
programs directed at understanding, 28
regional management systems, 124
scientific basis for management, 31, 55
stewardship, 26, 129
sustainable use, 44, 54, 59
synergistic focus, 51
understanding, 29, 50
values and services, 26
Biomonitoring of Environmental Status
and Trends, 112
Biota
documentation and assessment, 31
lack of basic knowledge, 27
preservation, 59
specimen and data collections, 67
Biotechnology, 25, 48, 71
Birds of North America, 65
Bishop Museum, 38
Botanical Society of America, 42
Breeding Bird Survey, 106, 112, 120
British Columbia
regional management system, 125
Bureau of Land Management, 32, 139
inclusion in NBS, 28
organization, 133
Bureau of Mines
inclusion in NBS, 28
Bureau of Reclamation
inclusion in NBS, 28
C
California, 158
INDEX 194
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
example of regional cooperation, 125
regional management system, 125
California Academy of Sciences, 38
Canada
biological survey, 51
biological surveys, 42
Carbon dioxide, 47, 73
atmospheric concentration, 47
buffering by natural processes, 45
Caribbean
biological surveys, 51
Caribbean Coastal Marine Productivity
program (CARICOMP), 40
decline in reef corals, 73
scientific expertise, 42
Carnegie Commission on Science and
Technology, 148
Census Bureau
Topologically Integrated Geographic
Encoding and Referencing, 107
Center for Biological Conservation, 39
Center for Plant Conservation, 40, 72
Central America
biological surveys, 51
scientific expertise, 42
Climate change, 47
preparations for dealing with, 54
Classification systems, 74, 111
development, 158, 159
limitations, 76
predictive, 64
uses, 75, 76
Collections, 38, 64, 67, 69-72, 84, 96,
103, 107, 109, 144, 147, 157
inventory of specimens and data, 69
Committee on the National Institute for
the Environment, 148
Communities and ecosystems, 60
effects of alien species, 86
effects of climate change, 47
effects of human settlement, 65
evaluation, 157
functional integrity, 87
inventorying threatened, 158
management, 76, 125
rate of change, 86
types, 64
understanding, 74, 77
Conservation
information needs, 96
Cooperative programs
role in NPBS, 39
Costa Rica
National Biodiversity Institute (INBio),
65, 97
D
Data and information
ability to provide, 52
challenges in computerization, 96
coordination and management, 106
custodianship, 109
dissemination, 117
ensuring scientific quality, 119
examples of necessary products, 121
formal review, 119
INDEX 195
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
historical information needs, 85
horizontal integration, 111
inherent incompleteness, 56
judicious use, 50
local application, 133
management, 112
management office, 160
management in NBS, 112
methods of exchange, 117
national network, 161
needs, 94
NPBS management programs, 162
organization, 51
policies and programs, 93
preparing manuals and guides, 159
problem-specific nature, 53
products, 117, 120
quality assurance, 117
range, 50
scale of application, 50
sharing, 108-120
software tools, 118
standards, 106
supplied by the NPBS, 117
technical reports, 117
usability, 106
vertical integration, 111
Data management, 51
functional requirements, 110
NPBS objective, 108
Databases
assessment of exiting, 157
biological, 84, 106
Center for Plant Conservation, 40
computerized, 160
conservation, 106
coordination, 106, 115
custodianship, 109
damage from interruptions, 52
development, 103
distributed queries, 111
environmental and socioeconomic, 107
flexible system design, 112
Flora of North America, 39
functional requirements, 110
Human Genome Project, 108
impediments to integration, 106
learning from others, 108
national and international, 75
NBS goals, 116
network interfaces, 110
NPBS development and organization, 31
queries on different scales and levels of
organization, 111
regional and statewide efforts, 161
requirements for NPBS, 94
specimen-based, 38
state level, 37
taxonomic, 106
The Nature Conservancy, 39
transformation, 109
use in ecosystem classification, 75
Decision-making, 59
available information, 54
communication of research findings, 94
information needs, 97
need for reliable information, 49, 93
role of NBS, 139
value and economic influences, 57
Delaware River basin, 39
INDEX 196
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Department of Agriculture, 117, 133, 140
Agricultural Research Service, 35
Forest Service and Soil Conservation
Service, 35
research programs, 73, 144
systematics research laboratories, 70
Department of Commerce
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, 35
Department of Defense, 36, 70
Department of Energy, 70
Department of the Interior (DOI), 5, 40,
70, 105, 124, 127, 128, 133, 140,
141, 160
cooperative research units, 144
diverse bureau mandates, 125
formation of NBS, 28
FY 1995 budget, 153, 154
internal reorganization, 151
land management bureaus, 125, 141
National Biological Survey, 123
proposed National Biological Status and
Trends Program, 112
role in NPBS, 32
Development
effect on natural resources, 124
Diversification, 51
E
Ecological diversity
esthetic experiences, 47
Ecological productivity
effects of climate change, 47
Ecological services
decline due to pollution, 45
maintenance, 45
management and conservation, 45
replacement by technology, 45
Ecological Society of America, 42
Ecology, 51
Ecosystems
alteration and degradation, 27
availability of short-term information, 47
determining highest priority, 157
documentation and assessment, 31, 53
environmental services, 25, 45
impact of changes, 79
interactions, 79, 80
inventorying, 158
location and size, 53
maintenance, 59
management, 71
modification from exotic species, 48
reducing undesirable effects, 45
research, 50
sensitivity to change, 54
structure and dynamics, 53
terrestrial and aquatic, 77
understanding location, 76
Endangered Species Act, 125, 139, 145
backlog of listing candidates, 26
embodiment of national policy, 43
recovery programs, 26
Environmental impact statements, 56, 77
INDEX 197
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Environmental Protection Agency, 36, 78,
79, 133, 140, 149, 154
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
Environmental Monitoring and Assess-
ment Program, 107
research programs, 144
Environmental research, 70
interdisciplinary, 60
needs, 149
problems facing, 149
species inventories and classification, 70
Evolutionary biology, 51
Exotic species, 48, 79, 86
F
Federal Coordinating Council on Biologi-
cal Survey, 142, 144, 148, 153, 155
Federal Geographic Data Committee, 107
Fertilizers, 45
Field Museum of Natural History, 38
Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, 154
Flora of North America, 65, 106, 113
information available from, 39
Florida Everglades, 158
Florida Museum of Natural History, 38
Freshwater Imperative, 40, 107
Functional integrity
communities and ecosystems, 87
definition, 27
Fungi, 44, 46, 59, 69-71, 81, 83, 87
G
Gap analysis
database, 106
program, 112, 120
program completion, 159
Gene sequences, 44
Gene splicing, 48
Geographic Information Systems, 104, 155
Global Change Research Program, 112
Great Lakes Fisheries Assessment, 112
Great Lakes Fisheries Councils, 139
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 73
Greenhouse gases, 47
H
Habitats
management and preservation, 25, 46, 47
variation in data needs, 53
Hawaii, 158
extinctions due to alien species, 86
native forests, 73
Human activities
biological impact, 44
contribution to decline in natural
resources, 27
effects on climate change, 47
effects on species, 65
environmental effects, 45, 48, 159
most affected geographic locations, 161
Human Genome Project, 108, 109
INDEX 198
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
I
Insects, 70, 71, 73
insectaria, 72
Interagency Task Force on Water Quality
Monitoring, 107
Interagency Working Group and Data
Management for Global Change, 107
Interior Geographic Data Commit tee,
105, 107
International Joint Commission on the
Great Lakes databases, 39
Internet, 108, 110, 161
Invisible present, 86
Izaak Walton League, 42
K
Keystone linkages, 76, 77
Keystone species, 76, 77
L
Land use decisions, 53
economic and biological effects, 57
Lichens, 71
Living collections, 72
M
Maps and mapping, 104
deficiencies, 104
Marine environments
degradation, 45, 49
lack of knowledge, 71
Massachusetts Audubon Society, 39
Medicines, 48
Metadata, 104, 107
Metropolitan areas
expansion, 27, 44, 46, 51, 156
ecological impacts of expansion, 95
low density land use, 45
percent of population, 51
Mexico
biological survey, 42, 51
Microbial diversity, 44
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, 139
Migratory birds, 45
Minerals Management Service, 28, 139
Missouri Botanical Garden, 38
Montana
regional management system, 125
Moths of North America, 65
Museums, 144
Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, 38
American Museum of Natural History, 38
Bishop Museum, 38
California Academy of Sciences, 38
efficient use of resources, 55
existing relevant programs, 30
Field Museum of Natural History, 38
Florida Museum of Natural History, 38
integration with NBS, 29
Missouri Botanical Garden, 38
National Museum of Natural History, 38
New York Botanical Garden, 38
role in NPBS, 38
INDEX 199
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
N
National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration
EOSDIS, 36, 107, 109
National Audubon Society, 39
National biological information system, 97
National Biological Status and Trends
program, 112, 116, 162
National Biological Survey
as information facilitator, 53
cooperative agreements, 144
cooperative research units, 144
coordination, 144
coordination within DOI, 138
critical role of state agencies, 133
data and information policies, 93
field and state coordination, 139
focus of information management, 160
formation, 28
FY 1994 budget justification, 28
FY 1995 budget, 154
leadership role, 49, 125
mandate, 128
mission, 5, 28, 127, 128
mix of scientific disciplines, 155
National Partnership for Biological Sur-
vey, 60, 61, 103
need for extramural research, 143
need for objective science, 128
personnel transfers, 142, 154
publication and electronic communica-
tion capabilities, 162
purpose, 129
recommended organizational structure,
134
relationship with management experts,
127
requirements for director, 129
research on ecological requirements, 73
research priorities, 156
role in NPBS, 29, 32, 152
role and function of, 125
scientific focus, 133
scientific work, 129
separation from the political process, 129
staff capabilities, 142
staff needs, 142
strategic implementation plan, 152
National Biotic Resource Information Sys-
tem
development of, 103
National Center for Atmospheric
Research, 108, 109
National Commission on the Environ-
ment, 148
National Environmental Council, 149
National Environmental Protection Act, 43
National Heritage database, 106
National Institute for the Environment, 149
National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), 112
National Institutes of Health, 70
National Marine Fisheries Service, 148
INDEX 200
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Biological Survey Unit, 38
National Marine Sanctuaries, 133
National Museum of Natural History, 38
National Ocean Service, 148
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), 35, 105,
107, 140, 154
agency responsibilities, 43
research programs, 70, 73, 144
National Park Service, 32
agency responsibilities, 43
cooperative research units, 144
impact of personnel transfers, 154
inclusion in NBS, 28
National Partnership for Biological Sur-
vey, 63
abilities of, 31
ability to communicate information, 52
accountability among participants, 152
benefits, 53
benefits to biodiversity prospecting, 48
biota analysis, 67
budgetary considerations, 140, 141, 145,
146
cataloguing of information, 54
comprehensive structure, 57
computerized databases, 160
contributions to information develop-
ment and use, 54
coordinating role, 80
coordination, 132
data and information policies, 93
data and information supply, 117
data standards, 106
description of, 29
desired characteristics, 49
development of credible information
base, 56
elements of, 32
federal level coordination, 55
federal programs, 155
framework for information assessment,
56
framework for multidisciplinary
research, 50
funding stability, 155
identifying target areas, 78
implementation, 123
information from, 50
information management plan, 160
information products, 53
institutional components, 32
leadership role of the NBS, 32
limits to, 56
long-term effect, 133
management of institutional relation-
ships, 123
means for effective organization, 49
need to set information priorities, 55
needs for scientific credibility, 49
online data dictionaries, 120
pilot projects, 90
print products, 121
priorities, 52, 61, 62
product communication, 121
product communication goals, 121
purpose, 31, 55, 57
research program, 50, 77
responsibilities toward selected taxa, 69
INDEX 201
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
risk of label, 57
role of cooperative programs, 39
role of DOI, 32
role of federal agencies, 32, 35
role of foreign biological entities, 42
role of museums, 38
role of native american groups, 40
role of NBS, 32
role of nongovernment organizations, 39
role of private interests, 40
role of Puerto Rico and other U.S. terri-
tories and lands, 40
role of scientists, 42
role of Smithsonian Institution, 37
role of states, 36, 145
role of the National Science Foundation,
143
role of the Smithsonian Institution, 37
scientific credibility, 49
scientific focus, 133
scientific information standards, 119
species distribution assessment, 69
stimulation of research, 50, 76
strategic implementation plan, 152
strategy for development, 52
strengths, 51
taxonomic research, 65
timely and accessible information, 94
use of information, 52
users and participants, 32, 65
uses of information gathered, 93
vegetation characterization, 75
National Research Council
Committee on Environmental Research,
148
National Science Board
recommendations, 146
National Science Foundation, 36, 143, 146
FY 1995 budget, 154
peer review, 147
research programs, 154
role in biodiversity research, 146
National Spatial Data Infrastructure, 104
building blocks of, 107
involvement of NPBS, 105
National Water Quality Information Sys-
tem (NWIS), 107
National Wetlands Inventory, 112
National Wildlife Refuges, 133
Native Americans
role in NPBS, 40
Nematodes, 44, 69, 71, 73
New York Botanical Garden, 38
Nongovernment organizations
relevant programs, 30
role in NPBS, 39
Nonrenewable resources, 44, 46, 51
Nutrient cycling, 71
Nutritional sources, 48
O
Office of Environmental Quality, 149
INDEX 202
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement inclusion in NBS, 28
P
Pacific Northwest forests, 125
Park Service Inventory and Monitoring
Program, 112
Partners In Flight, 40, 124
Pesticides, 45
Pilot projects, 78, 89, 90
data model systems, 161
goals, 90
regional collaboration, 70, 157
scope, 91
study of key species, 74
Pittman-Robertson Act, 145
Pollution, 79, 83
assessment, 49, 79
assimilating of pollutants, 25, 61
biological impacts, 95
biological indicators, 79
negative effects, 45
nonpoint, 79
of wetlands, 45
recognizing warning signs, 79
sensitivity of organisms to, 86
Population biology, 74
Population genetics, 51
Populations
distribution and abundance, 60
Private landholders
role in NPBS, 40
Private sector
conservation efforts, 26
existing relevant programs, 30
Public lands
acquisition, 26
Puerto Rico, 42
biological resources, 40
role in NPBS, 40
R
Regional Collaborative Projects, 90
Regional management system
complications in achieving, 125
Renewable resources, 46, 51
Research, 60
biological resources, 60, 63
broadening programs, 159
comparative, 51
communication of results, 118
coordination, 140
different perspectives, 104
domestic and international, 51
ecosystems, 73
environmental indicators, 158
federal spending, 146
human settlement patterns, 51
interdisciplinary, 60
restoration methods, 77
selected species, 73
short-term plan, 157
species diversity, 50
stability and financial support, 52
stimulating and coordinating, 50
stimulation of appropriate, 50
taxonomic, 65
type and scope, 50
Resources
human and financial, 61
Restoration, 48, 77
identification of target areas, 78
INDEX 203
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
inventorying, 158
marine environments, 49
of rivers, 78
pilot project, 78
potential candidate areas, 158
priorities, 78
research efforts, 159
research on methods, 77
Restoration biology, 77
Rivers
need for national inventory, 78
Russia
relevant expertise, 42, 51
S
Setting priorities, 59-61
data management, 160-162
for implementation, 151
general considerations, 62
multiple criteria, 61
personnel and administrative manage-
ment, 153, 155, 156
research and inventory programs, 156,
158, 159
Smithsonian Institution, 154
National Biodiversity Center, 37
research programs, 144
role in NPBS, 37
specimen-based databases, 38
Standard Methods for Measuring Biolog-
ical Diversity, 113
Social sciences, 51
Society for Conservation Biology, 42
Soils
contamination and erosion, 48
decontamination, 48
South Pacific
relevant expertise, 42, 51
Spatial analysis
new opportunities, 104
Spatial data, 103
collection and documentation of, 105
fuller use, 105
production, 104
Spatial interactions, 97
Species
changes in distribution and abundance, 87
criteria for study, 72
international distribution, 51
knowledge of natural history, 72
population biology, 64
relevance to environmental issues, 73
understanding ecological requirements,
72
where they occur, 72
Species distributions, 96
Species diversity, 57
Species viability, 44
State biological surveys, 36, 65, 106, 107
integration with NBS, 29
State Heritage Programs, 37, 39, 119
Statistical design and evaluation, 51
Status and trends, 50-53, 61
information, 55
measurement, 57
monitoring, 86
need for information, 44
objectives, 31, 83
predictive models, 159
Strategic implementation plan, 152
Systematics, 51
Systematics Agenda 2000, 107
INDEX 204
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
T
Taxa
appropriate for immediate study, 69
classification, 70
determining highest priority, 157
discovery and classification, 69
establishment of collections and informa-
tion, 70
field guides, 159
need for U.S. specialists, 71
Taxonomists
register of specialists, 157
The Nature Conservancy, 37, 39, 74
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
Heritage Program, 113
Toxicology, 51
Trends
mapping and monitoring, 74
U
United States
species, 65
taxonomic research, 65
Universities, 144
Cornell University, 38
existing relevant programs, 30
integration with NBS, 29
Ohio State University, 38
role in NPBS, 38
University of California, 38
University of Kansas, 38
University of Michigan, 38
University of Texas, 38
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 32, 78, 139
agency responsibilities, 43
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
Biological Survey Unit, 38
cooperative research units, 144
impact of personnel transfers, 154
inclusion in NBS, 28
Standard Methods for Measuring Biolog-
ical Diversity, 113
U.S. Forest Service, 78, 140, 148, 154
agency responsibilities, 43
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
U.S. Geological Survey, 128, 139
Biodiversity Research Consortium, 39
inclusion in NBS, 28
leadership role, 73
National Mapping Division (NMD), 107
Water Resource Division, 133
U.S. Global Change Data and Information
System (GCDIS), 107
V
Virgin Islands, 42
W
Wallop-Breaux Act, 145
Waterfowl Inventory, 112
Wetlands, 36, 45, 79
INDEX 205
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html