STORY PREFACE

Story Summary

Since 1896, the world's leading athletes compete in the Olympics. Baron Pierre de Coubertin (father of the modern Olympics), believed that athletic competition between amateur athletes would help improve international relations. He faced strong initial opposition to his idea that sports could temper politics.

Athens, the capital of Greece, hosted the first modern games. For more than a thousand years, another place in Greece - a sacred area called Olympia - hosted the ancient games. What do we know of those ancient games? How did they start? Why were they always held in Olympia?

To learn the answers to those - and more - questions, we need to take a trip back in time to the Archaic Period of ancient Greece.

 STORY PREFACE

Since 1896, the world's leading athletes compete in the Olympics. Baron Pierre de Coubertin (father of the modern Olympics), believed that athletic competition between amateur athletes would help improve international relations. He faced strong initial opposition to his idea that sports could temper politics.

Athens, the capital of Greece, hosted the first modern games. For more than a thousand years, another place in Greece - a sacred area called Olympia - hosted the ancient games. What do we know of those ancient games? How did they start? Why were they always held in Olympia?

To learn the answers to those - and more - questions, we need to take a trip back in time to the Archaic Period of ancient Greece.
THE LEGEND BEHIND THE GAMES

Oinomaos (Oenomaus) was a legendary king of Pisa (an area not far from Elis in the western part of Greece). His daughter Hippodameia, of marriageable age, had many suitors with whom Oinomaos was not always pleased. He had reason to worry. An oracle had warned Oinomaos that he would die at the hand of his son-in-law.

Boastful of his chariot-racing skills, Oinomaos issued a legendary challenge. He would determine the worth of any potential son-in-law by testing his racing skills. If the king failed to overtake any of his daughter's suitors in a chariot race between Olympia to the Isthmus of Corinth (where ships were moved overland in ancient times but now travel through the man-made Corinthian Canal), the victorious racer would could marry Hippodameia.

However, if any suitor lost the race, he would die. Many erstwhile suitors had already lost their heads to the sword of Oinomaos. The king, an expert charioteer, thought he would never lose. Then love interfered.

Desiring to marry a handsome suitor named Pelops, Hippodameia approached her father's charioteer, Myrtilus (Myrsilos), with a devious plan. If her father's chariot were missing a linchpin from one of its wheels, she could fix the outcome of the race between her father and her suitor. Myrtilus, also in love with Hippodameia, agreed to betray the king. He loosened the linchpin so the wheel would break free from the axle. (Note that some of the legends say it was Pelops who concocted the plan.)

With Oinomaos holding the reins of his horses, attempting to overtake the speeding chariot in front of him, his chariot wheels fell away. According to one version of the story, the king was caught in the reins and was dragged to death. Another version says that Pelops killed him. In either event, Oinomaos lost both control and his life. Pelops won the day and the bride. He also became king and, after conquering nearby Apia and Pelasgiotis, named the entire region after himself. The southern part of the Greek mainland is called the Peloponnese (or Peloponnesus, meaning Island of Pelops) to this day.

To honor Zeus (whose statue at Olympia, later sculpted by Pheidias, was one of the seven wonders of the ancient world) and to celebrate the life of Oinomaos (after his death) Pelops organized commemorative games to be held in Olympia. It was the beginning of a thousand-year tradition in the ancient Greek world. According to legend, it was also the beginning of a curse on Pelops' family.
OLYMPIA: HOST OF THE GAMES

Festival games were held in Olympia, in the section of Greece called Elis. (Elis is in the northwestern Peloponnesus.) Getting more rain than other parts of this dry country, Elis has more trees and forests. It also has beautiful groves. One of those groves, called Altis, was a sacred place.

Located in the valley between the rivers Alpheus and Kladeos, the grove of Altis represented holy - hence, neutral - ground. It was home (be patient with this slow-loading Greek web site) to the great sanctuary of Zeus, chief god of the Greeks, whom the ancients believed lived on Mount Olympus. A smaller sanctuary, dedicated to Hera (the wife of Zeus) was part of the sacred site. The area, where Greeks traveled to honor their gods, was also a perfect place to honor their top athletes. Included in the temple of Zeus (on the East Pediment) was a depiction of the chariot race between Oinomaos and Pelops.

For more than 1,000 years - in war or peace - Greeks gathered in Olympia for the Olympic festival. According to Hippias (a sophist who lived in Elis and, in the 5th century B.C., compiled a list of initial victors), the games began in about 776 B.C. They ended, in 393 A.D., when Emperor Theodosius I closed all ancient pagan sanctuaries and banned all associated games. His successor, Theodosius II, had the temples demolished in 426. Thereafter, earthquakes and floods buried the remains until the mid-19th century.

Let's take a trip to Olympia (today a small town of about 1,800 people who farm and tend to the tourists) to view what remains of the original Olympic stadium (and its surroundings).
A TRIP TO OLYMPIA

What did athletes, judges, and spectators see when they participated in the ancient Olympic Games? Between the writings of ancient historians, and ruins of buildings at Olympia, we can piece together what the games must have been like thousands of years ago.

    Spectators passed through a vaulted entry way as they came into the Stadium.


    They sat on wooden stands which were mounted on the earthen bank surrounding the stadium. The distance from the foreground starting line to the finish line (with its still-original stones) was a stade (also called stadion and measuring about 192.28 meters) from which "stadium" gets its name.


    To be sure they had a good view of the finish line, judges had a nearby seating area.


    Olympic athletes trained in a Gymnasium at Olympia.


    The Philippeion (situated to the left of the path which led back to the Stadium) was started by Philip of Macedon and likely finished by his son, Alexander the Great, hundreds of years after the first Olympic Games.


    Only foot races were part of the original games. Later, other sports were added and athletes, especially wrestlers, trained in the courtyard of the Palestra.


    Pheidias, the sculptor, had a studio at Olympia where he worked on his great statue of Zeus. Parts of the two-room studio, and its exterior, remain.


    Deterioration of the great temple of Zeus was aided by an earthquake which caused many of the columns to fall.

Who participated in the ancient Olympic Games? Were female athletes allowed to compete? Were women allowed in the stadium to watch the competition? Given the scope of our modern games, the restrictions which applied in ancient times may surprise you.
WHO PARTICIPATED?

Male Greek athletes, who were born free, participated in the ancient Olympics. They wore no clothes during their meets and ran barefooted. Scholars believe the type of clothing worn at the time would have restricted peak athletic performance.

Olympic festivals were so important that the Greeks imposed a Sacred Truce so athletes could freely travel. (In Greek, the word for truce - ekecheiria - means "holding of hands.") The words of the Truce were inscribed on a bronze discus, housed in the Temple of Hera, at Olympia. Its impact was significant.

While in effect, the truce suspended wars and death penalties, prevented armies from entering Elis and/or threatening the Games, and held legal disputes in abeyance. Sanctions were imposed against violators.

Women and girls could not participate as athletes in the ancient Olympic games. When equestrian events were added, women were allowed to own competing chariot teams and individual horses, but they could not ride the horses or guide the teams themselves. Pausanias (writing in the 2nd century A.D.) reports (at 5.8.11):

    Afterwards they added races for chariots and pairs of foals, and for single foals with rider. It is said that the victors proclaimed were: for the chariot and pair, Belistiche, a woman from the seaboard of Macedonia...

Unmarried girls were allowed to watch the competition, but married women were absolutely forbidden on penalty of DEATH. Pausanias:

    As you go from Scillus along the road to Olympia, before you cross the Alpheius, there is a mountain with high, precipitous cliffs. It is called Mount Typaeum. It is a law of Elis to cast down it any women who are caught present at the Olympic games, or even on the other side of the Alpheius, on the days prohibited to women.

A story is told of an exception to that rule. Pausanias continues:

    However, they say that no woman has been caught, except Callipateira only....She, being a widow, disguised herself exactly like a gymnastic trainer, and brought her son to compete at Olympia. Peisirodus, for so her son was called, was victorious, and Callipateira, as she was jumping over the enclosure in which they keep the trainers shut up, bared her person. So her sex was discovered, but they let her go unpunished out of respect for her father, her brothers and her son, all of whom had been victorious at Olympia. But a law was passed that for the future trainers should strip before entering the arena.

Females, in honor of Hera, were allowed to run foot races in the Olympic stadium. However, these races (for girls, teenagers, and young women who likely wore knee-length tunics covering the left shoulder and breast) were not part of the ancient Olympic games, and the distance they ran (about 160 meters) was less than the distance for male competition (about 190 meters).

When Pierre de Coubertin launched the modern Olympics in 1896, he incorporated the ancient tradition of preventing females from participating in track and field events. That total ban lasted until the Amsterdam games of 1928. After Germany's Lina Radke collapsed that year, following her gold-medal run of the 800 meters, women were once again banned - this time from all races over 200 meters. Those restrictions were not lifted until the 1960 games.
ANCIENT OLYMPIC SPORTS

The Olympics began in the Early Archaic Period - a time of Greek political, economic and cultural development. Some scholars think that Homer, a blind poet who is credited with both the Iliad and the Odyssey, likely lived (if he was an actual person) around 800 B.C., a mere twenty-four years after the first recorded Olympics.

Homer's epics - perhaps first written in the Ionic version of the Greek alphabet (which has roots in Phoenician characters) by someone who was listening to a "live" Homeric performance - remain important links to this ancient period.

Olympic sports, at the time of Homer (scroll down 80%) and later, were rooted in religion. First - and always foremost - athletes participated in sports to honor their gods. The Olympics were created to honor Zeus. The modern meaning of "sports" and "games" is therefore not descriptive for what the Greeks were really up to at their Olympics.

Competitive exercises, for a Greek living in the Archaic Period, were called agon (from which we get our word "agony"). Gymnikos agon (meaning "naked struggle") was the way an ancient Greek viewed athletic competition.

Ponos, Greek for "pain," was an expected part of training and competing. (The Greek god Ponos, parenthetically, was the son of Eris [strife] and Erebus [darkness].) And ... Olympic sports, at that time, were not team events. Focus was on individual performance and winning. No prizes were given for second and third place.

The foot-race was the first Olympic event - and the only event for the first 13 Olympiads. It measured a distance of one stade (192.28 meters for the Olympics) and took place in the stadion (from which we get our word "stadium"). The point of the race was to beat the best man, not run to a stop watch. Runners who "jumped the gun," to use a modern phrase, could be flogged by referees holding willowy rods.

At first, the Olympic stadium (where foot-races were run) was itself inside the Altis (the sacred area). Spectators viewed races from the Kronion (Kronos Hill).  By the late Classical period, however, a stadium was built east of the sacred precinct, where its remains (connected to the sanctuary by a vaulted passageway) are still visible.

Other sports - beginning with wrestling and the pentathlon in the 18th Olympiad - were added and, by Classical times, the games numbered eighteen. They included boxing, horse racing, and additional running events. The Marathon, which takes its name from the famous battle in 490 B.C.) was never part of the ancient Olympics.

Thanks to surviving Greek pottery, we can view ancient athletes in action. Let's take a look at their prowess.
ATHLETES IN ACTION

The stadium at Olympia held 45,000 spectators. The high priestess of Demeter Chamyne, a Greek goddess, was the only woman allowed to watch the events.

No time records of early foot races exist since there was no way to measure how long it took for the winner to reach the finish line. What does survive are statues and pottery depicting the runners.

A few important points about some events will highlight differences between the ancient and modern games:

    A key running event was called the Hoplitodromos (click here for the correct pronunciation) where athletes ran in full battle armor.


    The pentathlon included jumping (where, accompanied by flute music, athletes jumped into a pit holding halteres in their hands); running; javelin (separated into distinct events for distance and accuracy); discus throwing; and wrestling (part of the pentathlon in the Olympics but a separate event in the Panhellenic games).


    Wrestlers practiced as a trainer, rod in hand, coached their efforts.


    Boxing, as depicted in the mural from Acrotiri (found in ancient Thera) where two children are having a go at each other, was one of the oldest events.


    As boxers participated in their sport, Nike (the winged goddess of Victory) watched.


    Horse racing, an aristocratic sport then as it is now, included the quadriga (four-horse chariot) race which, according to ancient accounts, was the most spectacular (a la Ben Hur) equestrian event of all.

The athletes competed for a crown of wild olive leaves, made from a tree (called The Olive of the Beautiful Crown) which grew in the Altis. During the games, the crowns rested on a gold and ivory table in the Temple of Hera.

Like today, the real rewards were far more than a crown. So important was a win (for the athlete, for his family, for his town) that specific Olympic victories were used as historical reference points. (The battle of Marathon, for example, took place in the third year of the Olympiad in which Tisicrates of Croton [scroll down 60%] won the stadion for the second time.) Thousands of years later, we still know the names of athletes because Greek writers immortalized their exploits in stories and poems.

One is left to wonder whether victors in the modern games will still be talked about a thousand years from now!
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, although we are not reponsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.
STORY PREFACE

    Maybe the reason I never liked fairy tales
    was that
    I wondered what followed
    "And they lived happily ever after..."

    Jim Morris
    2001


It was the bottom of the 8th inning. The Texas Rangers were playing at home against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, a new expansion team based in St. Petersburg, Florida. Royce Clayton was the next Texas hitter.

Jim Morris, a 35-year-old rookie, was warming up in the bullpen. He had suited up for his first game in the major leagues. A few months before, Morris was a high school science teacher in Big Lake, Texas.

Improbably, the bullpen call came for Jimmy Morris. When he took the mound, and fired four pitches at Clayton, each ball traveled faster than 95 miles an hour.

Some might think the moment was the stuff of fairy tales. Except in real life, fairy tales don’t "just happen." They usually follow years of disappointment and hard work.

And some might think that fairy tales require a "happily ever after" ending. They usually do. Except in real life, heroes of a story often have their own definitions for that term.
NEW DIRECTIONS

As a young boy, Jimmy loved baseball. He could hit a ball far and throw it hard. But his father, Jim Morris Sr., was a Navy man. His job required the family to move from base to base.

Sometimes those moves were on short notice. One move brought the Morris family to Brownwood, Texas where the high school had no baseball program. Jimmy had to "make do" with high school football, the town’s passion. As a second-string quarterback for the Lions, he could throw a football 95 yards. He could punt 50 yards, into the wind.

If Brownwood High had given Jimmy Morris an opportunity to play baseball, perhaps his life would have taken a different direction. But the school’s football coach, Gordon Wood, believed that baseball would have detracted from the school’s football program. As Morris observes in his book, The Oldest Rookie:

    It is no exaggeration to say that my entire story is built on the consequences of that belief. If Brownwood had fielded a baseball team—well, there’s no rational conclusion to the thought. Everything would have been different. Sometimes you choose your own destiny, and sometimes it chooses you. (Morris, The Oldest Rookie, page 44.)

Playing football for the Lions, Jimmy Morris had no clue about his true destiny. But then, who among us ever really does?
PAYING DUES

Jimmy Morris knew he wanted to be a major league baseball star when he was a child. But sometimes knowing exactly what you want to accomplish in life is harder than not having a clue.

For twenty years Morris thought of little else. He wanted to play ball in the majors. He could pitch. He could even hit - a rare talent for a pitcher. But self-doubts can plague even the most optimistic, dedicated person when it seems like achieving the objective is an unrealistic goal.

It’s a rare person who gets to play professional baseball. It’s an even rarer person who goes straight to the big league without spending time in the "farm club," a system created by Branch Rickey in the 1920s. Even Mark McGuire started in the farm club.

Since he graduated from a high school that didn’t have a baseball program, Jimmy was behind - despite his innate talent. He possessed far less experience than he needed. A major league season has 162 games. Morris had played in a 12-game summer league. What realistic chance did he have to play pro ball?

Turns out, Coach Jack Allen from Ranger Junior College provided a way for Morris to get both experience and exposure. He offered Jimmy a full-ride scholarship. But those junior college days were short-lived. After a scout for the Milwaukee Brewers saw him pitch, Morris was that team’s fourth pick in the supplemental draft. With a $35,000 signing bonus, he thought his dream was finally coming true.

It was just the start of his professional dues-paying days.
LIFE IN THE MINOR LEAGUE

What Jim Morris hadn’t counted on was how much time a professional baseball player actually spends in the minor league - or what his life is like while he’s there. He found out soon enough when his Brewers roommate filled him in.

Morris describes the enlightening conversation in The Oldest Rookie:

    ...I didn’t know the minor-league system from astrogeology...I learned that the lowest level of play was rookie ball, and that if you played well there you were sent to either low-A ball or high-A ball, depending on whether you did really well. After that came double-A, then triple-A, then the big show - the major leagues. (The Rookie, pages 72-73.)

In other words, just because he was recruited by the Brewers, and was paid a $35,000 signing bonus, didn’t mean Morris had a slot on the Milwaukee team. The hard reality? He might never have a place on the team! His buddy, Tom Candiotti, explained why:

    It can take years - five, six, eight, even ten years or more. And most guys never make it at all. Major-league rosters are only twenty-five players, and every year a lot of new guys try to take their place. (The Rookie, page 73.)

So what were Jimmy’s chances of actually pitching for the Brewers?

    By the time you’ve made it to the top, you’re standing on a couple of thousand dead bodies, all of whom had the same dream you did and no idea what to do with their lives if that dream didn’t come true. Fewer than one percent of those drafted ever make the big leagues. (The Rookie, page 73.)

Jimmy realized he probably wouldn’t be in Milwaukee the year he was drafted by the Brewers.
THE REALTY OF PRO BASEBALL

The reality of pro baseball looks very different from the inside. What is a game to the fans is a business to the players and franchise owners. Competition is stiff. Slots are few. Disappointments - for the players - are many.

Jim Morris found that out. And more. Beginning his pro career in the rookie league, he didn’t travel to games on an airplane - his team took a bus. His per diem allowance was barely enough to buy hamburgers for each meal - and he was miserable:

    Then you checked into fleabag motels and ate three meals a day of burgers and fries, which is all you can afford on a six-dollar per diem and six hundred bucks a month. You played in small stadiums with so few fans that by the third game in a town you recognized everyone’s face and voice. (The Rookie, pgs. 79-80.)

Was the reality of pro baseball something Morris could handle, or was his life turning into a nightmare?

    If baseball wasn’t fun anymore, why did I still care about playing? And did I really care? Or was it just a lifetime’s momentum carrying me from day to day? Those were the riddles I couldn’t answer...It was disappointing to discover that the thing you thought you wanted all your life doesn’t feel at all the way you thought it was going to feel. (The Rookie, pg. 86.)

The "wannabe" major-league pitcher was beginning to understand the reality of pro baseball - and life in general. He would soon discover another truth.

Injuries to a pitcher’s arm can ruin his career.
IT'S OVER

It isn’t just the physical aspects of pitching that count in professional baseball. It’s also a pitcher’s mental composure that makes the best batters "go down swinging." Early in his pro career, Morris had plenty of physical ability. But what about that other, crucial factor?

    ...my biggest problem wasn’t my arm; it was my head. I didn’t face batters with the belief that I would dominate them. I did it with the fear of screwing up. (The Rookie, page 83.)

In other words, to BE a winner Morris had to believe he COULD be a winner. That confidence, for him, came neither easily nor quickly.

Then came the injuries. Before he reached the upper echelons of minor league baseball, Jimmy had a sore left arm. It hurt too much to throw 110 pitches a game. Before he was 25, he had two major operations on his pitching arm:

    January, 1986 - "Tommy John surgery." (Scroll down 10%; on the right-hand column, click on "How the Tommy John surgery works.") Using a patient’s healthy wrist tendon, doctors replace a damaged elbow tendon. Morris’ operation did not go as planned. His surgeons (Frank Jobe and Robert Kerlan) had to transplant an ankle tendon because they could not use his wrist tendon.

    Spring training, 1987 - Blown-out shoulder. Pitching well after his tendon transplant, another part of Jimmy’s pitching anatomy gave out.

        I wound up, and as my arm approached the release point, it froze. The ball flew out of my hand and sailed high over the plate, hitting the left edge of the backstop about twenty feet up. I grabbed my shoulder and knew right away it was serious. (The Rookie, page 127.)

After that surgery, the Brewers released Jimmy Morris. He was out of pro baseball. Temporarily.
TO THE WHITE SOX

By the time he was no longer playing for the Milwaukee Brewers, Morris was a married man. His wife, Lorri Eakin Morris, was a college graduate who worked in the admissions office at Angelo State University. The school was located in the Central West Texas town of San Angelo, a three-hour-drive southwest of Brownwood (where Jim had graduated from high school).

Because Jimmy had spent so much of his life playing baseball, he had not graduated from college. He got a job working for the Texas Youth Commission, transporting juvenile offenders around the state. He also enrolled at Angelo State.

He couldn’t stay away from baseball, however. He helped assess the talent of prospective players for Howard Payne University’s new baseball program. It wouldn’t be the last time Howard Payne was a significant factor in Jimmy’s life.

A year after his shoulder surgery, Morris was pitching batting practice to the Howard Payne team. He threw better and faster than ever. Walt Williams, a former big league player with several teams including the White Sox, was surprised by Jimmy’s progress. After a few well-placed calls by a few well-placed people, Morris was recruited by the Chicago White Sox. It was the fall of 1988. As Jimmy says:

    Dreams die hard. Maybe they never die at all.  (The Rookie, page 139.) 

But dreams, even when they come true, don’t always follow a prescribed path. Pitching for the White Sox instructional club in Florida, Morris performed well. Over the 1988/1989 winter he had one thought that buoyed his spirits. A White Sox executive told him he’d "be spending spring training with the triple-A club." He had never progressed that far before in pro baseball.

He wouldn’t progress that far in 1989 either. Playing with the White Sox high-A team, Morris was throwing 90-mile-an-hour pitches. But the batters on opposing teams were hitting those balls off the center park wall. Did he have another physical injury? A leading orthopedic surgeon told him:

    Jimmy, I can’t find anything physically wrong with your arm. We could go into the shoulder and look around, but that would set you back another year or two, and if you really don’t want to play anymore, there’s no reason to have the surgery at all. You’re twenty-five now. What do you want to do? (The Rookie, page 144.)

Morris was finished as a White Sox player. He collected his $1,500 monthly pay for the rest of the season. His dreams of baseball fame were about as real as the baseball movie he watched that year: Field of Dreams.
KEEP DREAMING!

Life went on for Jim and Lorrie Morris. In his late-twenties, the baseball player became a college-student football star. He won the NCAA Division II punting championship. He made consensus All-American. Not one NFL team checked him out. Not one football scout called. Morris wondered: Was he too old?

Although they initially planned to have none, the couple eventually had three children: a boy and two girls. Hunter, the oldest, was six when his dad got a job teaching science at Reagan County High School in Big Lake, Texas. Jamie, the youngest, was not yet born.

The school was about 70 miles away from the family’s home in San Angelo. But this job was important to the family. Jim and Lorri had recently reunited after a brief separation. And for the first time in his married life, Jim would earn as much money as his wife.

Big Lake is a West Texas town whose residents, like so many other West Texas residents, love high school football. Baseball, however, was another matter. In addition to teaching integrated chemistry and physics, Morris would coach a baseball team which had won only three games in each of the last three seasons. He would also serve as assistant football coach.

He pitched to his baseball players during batting practice. Ten years after he’d walked away from professional baseball, he was throwing well. His students complained he was throwing too fast. Although he didn’t realize it, he was throwing better than ever. He was 34 years old.

Urging his baseball team to shake themselves out of their "lackadaisical attitude," Morris told his students they could be winners if they would first be dreamers. It was March, 1999. His words would soon be used against him:

    What you better start realizing is that it takes dreams to accomplish anything. You have to have dreams. Without dreams, you’re nothing in this world. You need them. And the bigger your dreams, the more you can accomplish, the more you can do, the farther you’ll go. (The Rookie, page 226.)

Morris had more to say to his mostly Latino students:

    Reach out! Put a dream or goal just past where you can touch it at that moment. Then, once you do touch it, you’ve gotta reach a little higher. And a little bit higher. And a little bit higher. That’s how you get better, no matter what you do in life. (The Rookie, page 227.)

The pep-talking coach wasn’t prepared for what came next. His catcher, Joel DeLaGarza, spoke candidly:

    What about you, Coach? You’re preaching one thing and doing another. Don’t get me wrong. We all love you a lot. But the way you can throw the baseball ...pause... why aren’t you still playing? (The Rookie, page 227.)

The stunned teacher, and enthusiastic students, agreed to a pact which DeLaGarza proposed:

    If we win district, Coach, you have to try out for a major-league team.

His students meant it.
ANOTHER CHANCE

Who can ever say why unexpected events actually happen? Maybe it’s motivation. Maybe it’s belief in one’s self. Maybe, like Morris insisted, it’s the dream. Whatever the reason, the Reagan County Owls won the district championship in the spring of 1999.

Then they held their coach to his promise.

On 19 June 1999, Jim Morris and his three kids went to Howard Payne University in Brownwood, Texas. (Lorrie couldn’t get out of her job on such short notice. She had to administer entrance exams to would-be students at Angelo State University.)

The Tampa Bay Devil Rays were holding an open tryout that day. Around seventy hopeful young men were eager to actualize their potential in front of the Tampa Bay scouts. Jim Morris, former pro pitcher, felt foolish as he surveyed the scene. Most of these guys were half his age.

Doug Gassaway, a Devil Ray scout, wondered aloud what Morris was doing there. When he heard about the pact, he agreed to let Morris pitch. He’d have to go last.

Jim’s dad and stepmother were in the stands, watching him and supervising his kids. Gassaway just wanted to go home. It was hot - around 104 degrees. Of the 70-some guys trying out for a big-league team, no one showed any promise. Then Jimmy Morris stepped on the mound. His first warm-up pitch was 94 miles per hour. Gassaway thought his radar gun was broken.

The high school science teacher threw a blistering second pitch: 96 mph. Gassaway was sure some kind of electrical interference had caused false radar readings. Wrong again.

Morris fired his third pitch at 95 mph. The next twelve came in at 98. This 35-year-old guy, with greying temples, shocked the lifer baseball scouts. No one had ever seen anything like it.

To be sure about things, Gassaway made Jimmy throw fifty pitches. Everyone else had thrown thirty. On the mound, Morris watched the scouts shake their radar guns and compare their findings. As he walked away, relieved he hadn’t embarrassed himself, another pitching hopeful ran after him:

    You were throwing ninety-eight. Faster sometimes.

Morris didn’t believe him. People like Nolan Ryan threw that fast. But as Morris walked away, a shocked Gassaway yelled:

    Wait. I’m gonna call this in, and they’re gonna think I’m crazy—a thirty-five-year-old throwing that hard. (The Rookie, page 240.)

The Morris family answering machine had a dozen messages on it when Jimmy and his kids returned home from their trip to Brownwood.

Sometimes dreams really do come true.
JIM MORRIS: BIG-LEAGUE PITCHER

When a big-league team considers the unthinkable, they want to be sure their scout hasn’t witnessed a fluke. Morris had to return to Brownwood the next day to throw fifty more pitches.

The weather looked ominous. If they could quickly complete the practice session, they would beat the rain. But the Howard Payne catcher didn’t show up in time. Morris had to throw in the pouring rain. Not one pitch was slower than 96 miles an hour.

Morris accepted the Devil Rays’ offer and progressed to their affiliated minor league team, the famous Durham Bulls. At 240, he had a lot of weight to lose. The hot Carolina weather helped him lose about eight pounds a week.

Morris had a pretty good minor-league season. If he threw a home-run pitch, he shook it off. He had finally combined physical ability with mental toughness:

    Either maturity or God’s grace allowed me to immediately forget the homer and retire the next six batters in two innings by throwing ninety-eight-mile-an-hour fastballs and a vicious slider. (The Rookie, page 256.)

In the late summer of 1999, Morris finally got what had eluded him his entire baseball-dreaming life: a break. Each major-league team can expand their roster from 25 to 40 as the season winds down. He - and others - had a good season. But Jimmy Morris gave the Devil Rays something else - a great story. Press coverage, were he called up, would be sensational for both Morris and the losing team.

On Friday, 17 September 1999, at 10:30 p.m. EDT, two Durham Bull players were called up. One was Morris. The other was Steve Cox. They would play for the Devil Rays who were based at Tropicana Field stadium in St. Petersburg, Florida.

The next day the Devil Rays were scheduled to play at Ranger Stadium in Arlington, Texas. They would face the pennant-seeking Texas Rangers. Jimmy’s family could actually be there - to see him wearing a major-league uniform for the first time in his life.

Of course, he wouldn’t play - or so he thought.
IM MORRIS: TAMPA BAY DEVIL RAY

Wearing uniform number 63, the new Devil Ray took the mound to face Royce Clayton. Firing nearly 100-mile-an-hour pitches to his catcher John Flaherty, Jimmy Morris struck out Clayton. After the game, Flaherty gave the ecstatic pitcher a souvenir (which he still has) and a welcome:

    Hey, old guy. You might want this. Welcome to the major leagues.

Could the second-oldest rookie in the history of the major leagues sustain his hard-throwing streak and maintain his health? Two nights later, against the Anaheim Angels, Morris was a star again. Jim Edmonds, Mo Vaughn, and Tim Salmon were three big hitters making a combined salary of $16.1 million that year. Morris set them down in order.

After the season, the new Devil Ray pitcher was sent to the Arizona fall league. Only top prospects were invited. Morris performed amazingly well: He had a zero Earned Run Average and his fastball "timed hotter than one hundred miles an hour." He was trying to get a position known in the business as "situational lefty" - when a left-handed pitcher is called on (usually in the clutch) to pitch to a left-handed hitter.

It was Larry Rothschild, the Tampa Bay manager, who informed Morris of the team’s decision for the 2000 regular season:

    The competition for the role of "situational lefty" in the bullpen was strong, and when I boarded the team plane for Minneapolis, where the [2000] season was to begin, I believed that management had other plans for me. But somewhere over northern Florida, Larry Rothschild walked past me in the aisle and casually said, “You’re on the twenty-five,” meaning the twenty-five man roster. I was a major-league ballplayer. (The Rookie, pages 273-74.)

Morris pitched in the Devil Rays’ first game of the 2000 season - on April 3rd - against the Minnesota Twins. He struck out Jacque Jones to end the game. The Devil Rays won, 7-0.

But Jimmy’s moments of glory would soon come to an end. His 36-year-old body was afflicted with his old nemesis - an elbow injury.
JIM MORRIS TODAY

In May of 2000, the Devil Rays were playing the Yankees in New York. Paul O’Neill was at bat. The game was tied, bottom of the tenth. There were two outs, but the bases were loaded.

O’Neill bats left-handed. Jim Morris had been hired for just this moment. He was a "situational lefty." Rothschild made the bullpen call: Bring in Morris.

It should have been a moment of glory. Morris had performed well in similar situations since opening day.

    Lefties were hitting only .167 against me.

But that’s when Morris was not in pain. As he walked to the mound, to face O’Neill, he was not in top form:

    I jogged to the mound feeling less than perfect and fearing something was wrong. A stiff back and a tired, sore elbow had been dogging me since our new pitching coach decided to have me throw in the bullpen on game days, believing that it would improve my control. In the last five days I’d been up and throwing nine times. And now I couldn’t get loose. (The Rookie, page 275.)

Nor could he do his job. He walked in the winning run. Two days later he was back with the Durham Bulls. His elbow needed surgery again. In November of 2000, the Devil Rays released him and the L.A. Dodgers picked him up.

While playing with the Dodgers, Jim wrote his book, The Oldest Rookie. Suffering from tendinitis, however, he was soon forced to retire. He has never been a hard-throwing, major-league pitcher again. Instead, he is on the speaking circuit, motivating others to believe in themselves and to follow their dreams.

He and Dennis Quaid (who plays Morris in The Rookie) were made honorary Texas Rangers. Jim, who is pleased with the mostly accurate movie, made a cameo appearance in it. He plays an umpire.

Morris says that he is happy his major-league career ended so soon. (He pitched in 21 games; had a 0-0 win/loss record with no “saves” to his credits; had an Earned Run Average of 4.80 and struck out 13 in 15 innings.) Away from home for months at a time, he did not see his family. Living his lifelong dream, Morris let his marriage suffer. Had he remained in the majors, he knew he risked losing what meant the most.

And that, in the end, would have cost too much.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.
STORY PREFACE

Story Summary

    The game of Base Ball has now become
    beyond question
    the leading feature of the out-door sports
    of the United States.

    Charles A. Peverlly
    The Book of American Pastimes (1866)


During America’s War Between the States, captured Union soldiers were allowed to "play ball" inside the walls of their prison camp at Salisbury, North Carolina. By that time, baseball was becoming an important sport in the country.

In his 1866 Book of American Pastimes, Peverelly also says this about baseball and America’s civil-war generation:

    It is a game which is peculiarly suited to the American temperament and disposition; the nine innings are played in the brief space of two and one half hours, or less. From the moment the first striker takes his position, and poises his bat, it has an excitement and vim about it ... in short, the pastime suits the people, and the people suit the pastime.

Baseball became popular as an organized, amateur sport in the 1840s and 1850s. How did it rise to prominence so quickly?
THE EARLY DAYS

Boys playing games with balls and sticks can be traced to Tudor England, Russia and Germany, but the true beginnings of “baseball” are shrouded in mystery. We do know, however, that in 1760 a British children’s book (A Little Pretty Pocket-Book, intended for the Amusement of Little Master Tommy, and Pretty Miss Polly by John Newbery) includes a page on Base-Ball.

Key elements of the game (also referenced in the 1744 edition of the book) are mentioned in this poem:

    Base-Ball

    The Ball once struck off,
    Away flies the Boy
    To the next destin’d Post,
    And then Home with Joy.

In 1787, Isaiah Thomas published the same book for American children and sold it in his Massachusetts book shop. The First Worcester Edition references several games in addition to base-ball: badminton (“shuttle-cock”), cricket, stool-ball, trap-ball, tip-cat and hop-scotch.

At about the time Louis XVI was forced to accept a French constitution - and a few weeks before Mozart’s opera, The Magic Flute, premiered in Vienna - the town of Pittsfield, Massachusetts passed an ordinance to prevent ball-game players from breaking new windows in the town hall. “Baseball" was included in the prohibited list:

    Be it ordained by the said Inhabitants that no person or Inhabitant of said Town, shall be permitted to play at any game called Wicket, Cricket, Baseball, Batball, Football, Cats, Fives or any other games played with Ball, within the Distance of eighty yards from said Meeting House. (September 5, 1791 ordinance.)

Baseball, in some form, must have also been played in Manhattan during the 1820s, as evidenced by this reference in the National Advocate newspaper:

    I was last Saturday much pleased in witnessing a company of active young men playing the manly and athletic game of “base ball” at the Retreat in Broadway. (National Advocate - April 25, 1823.)

The first recorded baseball game in Canada took place in Beachville, Ontario on the 4th of June, 1838. Although it wasn’t baseball as we know it, there were many similarities. (Don’t miss this video.)

One of the early teams, playing in New York, was the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club. Were its players professionals? Was the game governed by rules at that time?
THE KNICKERBOCKER CLUB

As the nineteenth century moved into its fourth decade, Alexander Cartwright wrote rules for the Knickerbockers, an amateur New York City baseball club. Those early rules (which were adopted on the 23rd of September, 1845) provide a bit of history (perhaps accurate, perhaps not) for the “Recently Invented Game of Base Ball.”

    For many years the games of Town ball, Rounders and old Cat have been the sport of young boys. Recently, they have,  in one form or another, been much enjoyed by gentlemen seeking wholesome American exercise. In 1845 Alexander Cartwright and other members of the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York codified the unwritten rules of these boys games into one, and so made the game of Base Ball a sport worthy of attention by adults. We have little doubt but that this gentlemanly pastime will capture the interest and imagination of sportsman and spectator alike throughout this country.

Within two weeks of adopting their rules, members of the Knickerbocker Club played an intra-squad game at the Elysian Fields (in Hoboken, New Jersey). The October 6th game appears to be the first recorded by an American newspaper.

Those early games (announced in local papers) were often high-scoring, as a Knickerbocker tally sheet (from a record book maintained at the New York Public Library) demonstrates. On this particular day, the Knickerbockers lost the 41-34 game.

Players whose conduct did not conform to the rules were fined - as evidenced by Article V of the Knickerbockers’ 1848 Constitution - and they had to pay before they left the field. A few examples of non-tolerated infractions:

Swearing: 	12½ cents for each offense
Arguing with the umpire: 	12½ cents
Disobeying the team captain: 	50 cents

One dollar, in 1848, was roughly equivalent to $21 today.

Daniel “Doc” Adams, considered by some historians to be the true “Father of Baseball,” became president of the Knickerbocker Club in 1847. Balls, in those early days, were light-weight and dark-colored, so the game was not dominated by home-run hitters. Under Adams’ leadership, the Knickerbockers became a preeminent baseball club, and their Hoboken playing field was - at least for a time - the most well-known baseball field in the country.

It is believed the first published picture of a baseball game was printed in a weekly newspaper called Porter’s Spirit of the Times. That September 12, 1857 woodcut depicts two New York clubs, the Eagles and the Gothams, playing at Elysian Fields. The following year, a scene in Mason Village, New Hampshire clearly depicts a baseball game in progress.

Even though teams were playing ball in the northern United States, there is no evidence it was popular throughout the south before the Civil War. That conflict, however, introduced the sport to many new players.
BASEBALL and the CIVIL WAR

Before America’s civil war, baseball was mostly known - and played - in the north. Confederate soldiers, watching their Union counterparts playing baseball in southern prison camps, were thus introduced to a new sport. When Union and Confederate soldiers returned home, factory workers and rural farmers alike knew how the game was played.

Baseball clubs, whose members were not soldiers, also played ball during the war. The Brooklyn Atlantics were not only the best team for most of the war years - they often crushed their opponents with lopsided scores. Players, however, were still amateurs since wages were forbidden by the rules of the National Association of Base Ball Players.

Even though crowd-drawing teams could not be paid a salary, corporate leaders quickly recognized baseball’s marketing potential. In 1867, a tobacco company sold its “Star Club” brand by using a generic baseball scene in its label.

After the war, the “First Nine” players of the “Cincinnati Red Stockings” Base Ball Club were paid a salary in 1869. They became baseball’s first professional team.

As the sport took hold, teams were formed in various places - including onboard military ships. The U.S. Navy even sponsored a championship. During those early times, African-Americans were also members of such teams.

In December of 1897, the squad of the USS Maine (a battleship) defeated the team of the USS Marblehead (a cruiser) to win the Navy’s championship. The star of the Maine team was William Lambert, a black man from Hampton, Virginia. His job on the ship was engine stoker. His job on the team was pitcher. A shipmate said that Lambert was “a master of speed, curves, and control.”

Two months after they won the championship, the entire team was aboard ship when the Maine exploded in the harbor at Havana, Cuba. Every team member died except for J.H. Bloomer.

When America’s Supreme Court declared that “separate but equal” was an acceptable way to treat African-Americans, things changed for black baseball players. “Jim Crow Laws,” interfering with newly enacted constitutional rights for former slaves, caused blacks to form separate baseball clubs. “Negro Leagues” continued until Jackie Robinson and Branch Rickey (manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers) broke the color barrier in 1947. Twelve more years would pass before all major-league baseball teams were integrated.
FOR LOVE of the GAME

Mark Twain observed that baseball matched the character of nineteenth-century America. It was, he said:

    the very symbol, the outward and visible expression of the drive and push and rush and struggle of the raging , tearing, booming nineteenth century. (Quoted in Autumn Glory: Baseball’s First World Series, by Louis P. Masur, page 192.)

Walt Whitman, the poet, went further, declaring that baseball was as important to Americans as their Constitution. He affectionately called it:

    America’s game: has the snap, go, fling, of the American atmosphere - belongs as much to our institutions, fits into them as significantly, as our constitutions, laws: is just as important in the sum total of our historic life. It is the place where memory gathers. (Quoted in Autumn Glory: Baseball’s First World Series, by Louis P. Masur, page 192.)

By 1925, Virginia Woolf - the British novelist who was touring the United States that year - agreed with the conclusion of Ring Lardner (a then-famous writer) that “in America there is baseball instead of society.” In a country which was vast, young and lacking centuries of unifying traditions - unlike her own - Woolf saw baseball as an American common denominator. Unifying people, the game was

    a centre, a meeting place for the divers activities of a people whom a continent isolates, [and] whom no tradition controls. (Quoted in The Norton Book of Sports, edited by George Plimpton, page 162.)

From reading H.L. Mencken’s American Language, published in 1919 (and subsequently updated), Woolf also knew that phrases like “play ball,” “strike out” and “shut out” were already part of America’s vocabulary. Admiring how Americans reacted to the sport that was “indigenous to the soil,” Woolf observed:

    Americans are doing what the Elizabethans did - they are coining new words. (Quoted in Walt Whitman’s Native Representations, by Ed Folsom, page 28.)

Let’s take a look at the game - and how it was played - in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries.
WOMEN PLAYERS in the 19TH CENTURY

After the Civil War, as people throughout America played or watched baseball, its popularity soared. As early as 1858, people wrote songs about the game. Corporate marketers pushed products with it. Even before the first professional team was paid a salary, Americans looked forward to the “boys of summer.”

It wasn’t just men who played ball, however. In 1866, Annie Glidden - a student at Vassar - wrote a letter to her brother in which she describes baseball for women on campus. A year after President Lincoln’s assassination, Annie was playing ball at the new university. According to her April 20, 1866 letter:

    They are getting up various clubs now for outdoor exercise. They have a floral society, boat clubs, and baseball. I belong to one of the latter, and enjoy it hugely, I can assure you. . .We think after we have practiced a little, we will let the Atlantic Club play a match with us. Or, it may be, we will consent to play a match with the students from College Hill [a local boys’ prep school], but we have not decided yet.

One of the Vassar teams was called the Resolutes, and a picture of their 1876 starting nine survives.

Were female teams commonly accepted at that time? Sophie Foster Richardson’s comments help to answer that question. Like Glidden, she was a member of a Vassar baseball club:

    The public, so far as it knew of our playing, was shocked, but in our retired grounds, protected from observation by sheltering trees, we continued to play in spite of a censorious public.

An 1868 article, published in a local Peterboro, New York newspaper, tells us that women were not just playing baseball at a university. Two female clubs in upstate New York, playing against each other, drew crowds of spectators. The illustrated story was reprinted in It’s the Day’s Doings. The commentary is interesting:

    We hear on all sides of woman - of her rights and of her wrongs . . . and lately, some of the more favored portion of our rural districts have beheld her as . . . a player of base-ball. In the latter capacity, at least, she deserves our unqualified attention and commendation . . . Every well-wisher of woman - (and what man with a wife, sweetheart, sister or daughter is not such a well-wisher) - will wish our female base-ball clubs, and similar organizations, all success, and only wish that there were more of them.

Then, using words - and employing attitudes - of the time, the larger New York paper quotes the local one:

    The last success in female base-ball, occurred at Peterboro, a thriving little village in New York State, and is thus recorded by the local paper:

    "The young women of Peterboro, N.Y., jealous of the popular sports enjoyed by the more muscular portion of mankind, have organized a baseball club, and have already arrived at a creditable degree of proficiency in play. There are about fifty members belonging to it, from which a playing nine has been chosen, headed by Miss Ninnie Miller as captain. The nine have played several games outside the town and away from the gaze of the curious. Having thus perfected themselves, this nine lately played a public game in the town of Peterboro, as may well be supposed, before a multitude of spectators."

The first women’s professional team was formed in 1875. A player’s attire was a hindrance on the field. Adding up to thirty pounds of weight, a baseball outfit of the time included underskirts, a long over skirt, a high-necked blouse with long sleeves plus high-button shoes. Stealing bases, on a hot day, was probably not a feature of that game!
THE COLOR LINE

Eight years after the first women’s professional team was formed, Moses Fleetwood Walker was the Toledo Blue Stockings’ catcher. Still a minor-league team, in 1883, the Toledo "nine" (as starters were called at the time) were ready to begin a game against the Chicago White Stockings on the 10th of August. Then, a problem surfaced.

"Fleet" (as the Toledo catcher was known) was African American. Adrian "Cap" Anson (leader and star of the Chicago team known as the "Cubs" since 1903) refused to take the field against a man of color. Although the game went forward that day - and Fleet Walker became the first regular black major-league player when his team joined the American Association the following year - the sport itself was on the verge of a significant backtrack. Too many people shared Cap Anson’s point of view.

As the nineteenth century drew to a close, African-Americans were forced to play segregated baseball. Sol White (an infielder/outfielder on various teams) documented some of those years (from 1887 through 1903) with his History of Colored Base Ball. In the book’s current edition, the late historian Jerry Malloy included contemporary documents like this April 11, 1891 article from Sporting Life magazine:

    Probably in no other business in America is the color line so finely drawn as in base ball. An African who attempts to put on a uniform and go in among a lot of white players is taking his life in his hands.

Were black and white players also treated differently by business establishments as they traveled to various towns? From firsthand experience, Sol (a 2006 Hall-of-Fame inductee) tells us that it was even difficult for him, and others similarly situated, to find a place to sleep:

    The colored player suffers a great inconvenience at times while traveling. All the hotels are generally filled from the cellar to the garret when they strike a town. It's a common occurrence for them to arrive in a city late at night and walk around for several hours before getting a place to lodge. (Sol White's History of Colored Base Ball, page 77.)

It was not always thus. White describes a significant change:

    The situation is far different to-day in this respect than it was years ago. At one time the colored teams were accommodated in some of the best hotels in the country ... The cause of this change is no doubt due to the condition of things from a racial standpoint. With the color question upper-most in the minds of the people at the present time, such proceedings on the part of hotel-keepers may be expected and will be difficult to remedy. (Sol White, page 78.)

Sol White traced the attitude change to Cap Anson. He could not understand why Cap was so opposed to African-American players, but that issue - according to White - caused an unwritten "color line" to evolve:

    Just why Adrian C. Anson, manager and captain of the Chicago National League Club, was so strongly opposed to colored players on white teams cannot be explained. His repugnant feeling, shown at every opportunity, toward colored ball players, was a source of comment through every league in the country, and his opposition, with his great popularity and power in base ball circles, hastened the exclusion to the black man from the white leagues. (Sol White, pages 76-77.)

The "color line" was not broken until Jackie Robinson stepped onto Ebbets Field - in Brooklyn - on April 15, 1947.
EARLY BASEBALL PRINTS

During the second half of the nineteenth century, newspapers like Harper’s Weekly (which was first published on the third of January, 1857) and Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper (which was created by Frank Leslie and always featured interesting drawings of people, places, battles and events - including murders) began to include wonderful pictures of baseball and its players. Most of these old pictures survive, such as:

    The Brooklyn Atlantics, in 1865. (Harper’s Weekly; 1865)

    Baseball’s first professional team - the Cincinnati Red Stockings - in 1869. (Harper’s Weekly; 1869)

    Spectators watched Baseball in England as the Philadelphia Athletics, and the Boston Red Stockings, introduced baseball to other countries during a mid-season world tour. (Harper’s Weekly; 5 September 1874)

    Cap Anson was twenty-one years old when he played for the Philadelphia Athletics in 1874. (Harper’s Weekly; 5 September 1874)

    Canadians have played baseball for a very long time, as demonstrated by the Maple Leaf Base-ball Club of Guelph, Canada. (Harper’s Weekly; 12 September 1874)

    The Boston Red Stockings, of 1874, eventually became - believe it or not - the Atlanta Braves. (Harper’s Weekly; 1874.)

Before long, companies realized the benefits of coupling their ads with popular items like baseball scorecards (such as this one from the Brooklyn Grays, in 1884). But when it came to advertising and baseball - in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries - nothing compared to the creation of baseball cards. Let’s investigate how they began.
BIRTH of TRADE CARDS

Louis Prang was born in the German town of Breslau (known today as Wroclaw, Poland) where his father taught him engraving and printing skills. In 1850, when Louis was twenty-six years old, he moved to America and settled in the Roxbury section of Boston.

Within six years, the recent German immigrant started his own business, employing his knowledge of lithography and printing to create (among other things) cards depicting scenes in Massachusetts, his adopted state. By 1860, Prang was producing business advertisements using colored printing, and during the Civil War he created maps and battle drawings. As lithographic processes improved, skilled artists were able to create wonderful colored works such as these sea anemones from Ernst Haeckel’s 1904 Artforms of Nature.

At a time when people used a small card to introduce themselves - called a carte de visite - Prang began to mass-produce small trade cards to introduce, or advertise, products. Thread companies, such as Clark’s, were among the first businesses to use them.

Prang also created beautiful calendars and “scrapbook” cards, depicting scenes of nature and patriotic themes, which companies used to tout their wares and consumers collected and placed in albums. It was just a matter of time before advertising cards, featuring heroes and baseball players, were coupled with tobacco products.
BIRTH of BASEBALL CARDS

Before we explore how nineteenth-century tobacco companies used baseball cards to market their products, we need to ask this question: Were there health concerns about tobacco use at that time?

In 1836, Dr. Caleb Ticknor warned that tobacco was “the most deadly, the most noxious poison.” In fact, there was considerable controversy about tobacco use in the 1800s, as demonstrated by numerous Harper’s Weekly cartoons.

Despite health concerns which existed at the time, American tobacco users - after the Civil War - were not satisfied with merely smoking pipes and snuffing or chewing tobacco. They wanted cigarettes, which were hand-rolled at the rate of about four per minute.

Mass production could never happen at those numbers, so Allen & Ginter (a Richmond, Virginia company) offered a $75,000 prize to anyone who invented a workable cigarette-rolling machine. James Bonsack, an eighteen-year-old Roanoke student, left school to work on a design. He filed a patent for his cumbersome-looking device on the 4th of September, 1880.

Bonsack’s cigarette roller didn’t always work properly, and it was shunned by every tobacco producer except James Buchanan (“Buck”) Duke. Taking a chance with the machine, Buck Duke (from W. Duke & Sons in Durham, North Carolina) mechanized the tobacco industry - and made a fortune for himself. With two of the new machines, Duke’s company produced 4 million cigarettes a day - compared to about 46,000 by his competitors. Able to substantially reduce the price of his product, Duke more than made up in volume what he gave up in price-per-unit.

Mechanized production required new packaging to separate, and protect, the cigarettes. A small piece of cardboard would do the job. Historians are not sure who made the first cards which helped to stiffen a pack of cigarettes, but Duke gets the credit for first using them.
A VALUABLE HOBBY

Duke Cigarette inserts depicted many different subjects, but they were not the first to include baseball scenes and players. That designation - according to the Library of Congress - goes to Allen & Ginter. Their "World’s Champions," of 1887, "is generally acknowledged as the first significant tobacco set issued."

Collecting baseball cards soon became a passion - and ultimately big business - not just for children but for adults. Honus Wagner - a Hall of Fame second baseman for the Pittsburgh Pirates - was upset, however, when his picture was used, without his permission, to sell cigarettes. He unwittingly created the most sought-after card in the world today because of his concerns about smoking.

Wagner, it is said, demanded that cards with his image - which cost less than a penny to buy - be pulled from production in 1909. As a result, very few of the T206 White Border #366 Honus Wagner cards were ever issued. One of them - which formerly belonged to Wayne Gretzky - reportedly sold for $2.35 million in February, 2007.

Whoever thought that the origins of baseball, and baseball cards, could be so interesting?
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.

 


