 to a
successful NBS and National Partnership. Establishing the priorities outlined here
will help both the NBS and the NPBS to provide quickly the kinds of results that
are essential if they are to show their value to the nation.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 21
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
WHAT ARE THE LIMITS TO THE NATIONAL
PARTNERSHIP?
The National Partnership has the potential to serve the nation well as it
grapples with increasingly contentious and challenging issues in managing its
biological resources. Yet, the very richness and diversity of our biological
resources mean that decisions will often need to be made from incomplete
information. Even when sufficient information is available, government must
respond to public concerns that might influence decisions in a direction different
from that indicated by scientific findings.
The NPBS will provide a much stronger information base from which to
make decisions about the nation's biological resources, but hard choices and
conflicts will remain. The National Partnership will be most useful in preventing
costly environmental confrontations if it has a paramount scientific function,
maintains a long-term commitment to scientific excellence, and is well-integrated
across its membership.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 22
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
NATION
23
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
24
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
1
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL
SURVEY FOR THE NATION
We Americans are increasingly aware of how much our well-being depends
on the diversity of living organisms and the integrity of ecological communities.
We depend directly on other species for new and improved sources of food,
fiber, construction materials, and medicines. In addition, much of our economic
base is related to income from all those resources and from tourism and
recreation. For example, recreational hunting and fishing are enjoyed by tens of
millions of Americans each year and create a major demand for the effective
management of habitats that contain game species and other wildlife.
Natural diversity also has many indirect values. It is the source of genes from
wild organisms that can be incorporated into domesticated species to improve
production and to provide resistance to diseases and pests. Biodiversity is the
foundation of biotechnology, an important and growing economic activity.
The nation's ecosystems provide such valuable environmental services as
controlling floods, conserving and forming soils, assimilating pollutants, and
moderating local climates. Loss of
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION25
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ecological habitats has caused problems in each of these areas. In addition to
those explicit ecological services, natural resources provide important
recreational, aesthetic, and spiritual values to our culture.
Recognizing the value of its biological resources, this country has
promulgated laws and policies to protect plants and animals from extinction. It
has also demonstrated a strong commitment to wise, responsible, scientifically
based stewardship of its biological resources through regulatory programs,
acquisition of public lands, and an array of private conservation efforts. (As used
in this report, the term biological resources refers to living organisms, their
products, and the ecosystems in which they occur that are actually or potentially
useful materially, ecologically, scientifically, or aesthetically or that are protected
under law, treaty, or other legal instrument.)
Despite those endeavors, the nation's biological diversity is in decline, and
there are many unanswered questions about how it should be managed to support
sustainably all the goods and services on which we depend. For example, off
Florida's Key Largo, coral reef area decreased in abundance by 30% in the last 20
years (Wilson, 1992). In the United States alone, over 760 species of fishes,
crayfish, and fresh-water mussels (44% of all the species in these groups) are
considered to be at risk (Stein, 1992); only 70 (24%) of the 297 species of
freshwater mussels in the United States are considered to have stable populations
(Williams et al., 1993). A national survey of endangered species of plants
conducted in 1988 revealed that over 780 native taxa (of a total of some 20,000
species) are facing possible extinction by the end of the 1990s (Falk, 1991).
Additional taxa are added to the list annually as new threats are discovered and
the decline of populations continues.
Nationally, 775 species of plants and animals have been listed as threatened
or endangered, and there is an enormous backlog of candidate species that have
been nominated for listing. Recovery programs have been developed for only
about half the listed
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION26
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
species and have been implemented for fewer. It should be clear that the nation is
facing a decline in its living natural resources and, more important, that the
current legal and institutional structures are inadequate to protect these resources.
Human activities are widely recognized to be a major contributor to the
decline. The rapid and continuing growth in the land occupied by our
metropolitan areas and our patterns of resource development and use are both
putting pressure on the country's ecological systems. The broad extent of the
pressure and its specific effects are poorly understood.
Declines in the quantity and quality of the nation's biological resources are
due in part to a lack of basic knowledge of its biota, ignorance of trends, and
inefficient use of existing information. We do not know how our alteration and
degradation of ecosystems affect their ability to provide in a sustainable way the
goods and services on which our society depends, nor do we understand the
impacts of human activities on these ecosystems. We do not even know, for many
groups of organisms, how many species occur in the United States and where
they live. In many of these cases, and even among many species that are known,
we have little information about their ecological relationships.
Such a lack of information is critical because we continually make
important, and often irreversible, decisions concerning these resources. The
societal consequences to society of these deficiencies are certain to increase in the
future. The constantly growing pressures of human society on the environment
guarantee that maintaining the functional integrity of ecological systems will
become ever more difficult. (By functional integrity we mean the capacity of
communities to maintain their productivity, cycling of nutrients, and species
composition in the face of environmental stresses. A community has lost its
functional integrity when it is no longer capable of maintaining those functional
attributes.) The consequences of loss of or harm to natural resources are costly to
both the public and private sectors.
Frustration with the current process is now shared among
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION27
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
natural-resource users and managers, scientists, and the public at large. No clear
national agenda or strategy exists for integrating the many programs directed at
understanding our biological resources.
Recognizing the need for change and a better means of informing its own
decision-making efforts, the Department of the Interior (DOI) is in the process of
reorganizing to form a new agency, the National Biological Survey (NBS). The
NBS will not be a survey in the everyday sense of the word, although it will
include strong survey-like elements. The purpose of this Committee of the
National Research Council (NRC), entitled the Committee on the Formation of
the National Biological Survey, is to provide guidance as to the scope and
direction of the NBS in the context of both national needs and those within DOI.
As identified in its FY 1994 budget justification to Congress, the mission of
this new agency is ''to gather, analyze, and disseminate the information necessary
for the wise stewardship of our Nation's natural resources, and to foster an
understanding of our biological systems and the benefits they provide to society.
The NBS will act as an independent science bureau [within DOI] without
advocating positions on resource management issues and without regulatory or
land and water development authorities.''
To create the NBS, the Secretary of the Interior has proposed combining
substantial portions of the biological research and survey activities in three DOI
bureaus—the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), the National Park Service (NPS),
and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)—with smaller portions of five other
departments—the Minerals Management Service, the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, the Bureau of Reclamation, the U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS), and the Bureau of Mines.
The committee believes that the National Biological Survey will be a critical
first step toward assembling a comprehensive assessment of the nation's
biological resources. However, to achieve the best possible results, there must be a
coordinated national
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION28
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
effort that draws on existing programs and strengths at all organizational and
jurisdictional levels. The work of the NBS must be integrated with the continuing
efforts of other relevant federal agencies, state surveys, museums, academic
institutions, and other entities. This joint, integrated enterprise can be called the
National Partnership for Biological Survey (NPBS). This National Partnership
would be a new national, multisector program to facilitate the collection,
housing, assessment, and use of scientific information needed to understand the
current and historical state of the nation's biological resources, how that state is
changing and projected to change, and the natural and human-induced causes of
the changes. The NPBS would provide a substantial amount of new information
and much more powerful opportunities for analysis than those available now. It
would provide the scientific information that is needed to develop appropriate
strategies for managing our nation's biological resources (including mitigation
and restoration), their use, and their preservation.
Although the Partnership will necessarily be a highly collaborative
undertaking, it will require clear leadership to be coordinated effectively. With
the formation of the National Biological Survey, the committee believes that the
most logical federal leader is DOI. The mission and mandates of the department
encompass broad research and management responsibilities for the natural
resources of the nation. DOI also has strong links to key nonfederal partners,
including the states and universities. By initiating the formation of the National
Biological Survey, the department has implicitly indicated its willingness to take
on this role. After examining various alternative possibilities, the committee
concluded that no other federal office or agency possesses all the necessary
characteristics. The regulatory focus of such agencies as the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) can create problems in an attempt to lead the kinds of
long-term research efforts that the National Partnership will need to perform
(NRC 1985, 1993b). Other agencies are either more narrowly focused on specific
components of the nation's biological resources—e.g., the Na
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION29
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration focuses on marine
environments, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture focuses on forests and
agricultural systems—or do not have management responsibilities or as strong
ties to key users as does DOI.
Many of the elements of the National Partnership already exist. Thousands
of scientists are working on relevant projects and programs scattered throughout
federal, state, and local agencies; academe; museums; nongovernment
organizations; and the private sector. But major elements are missing and must be
supplied if an effective National Partnership is to be created. In addition to some
key additional programmatic components, the NPBS will need effective
mechanisms for horizontal and vertical integration and coordination. This report
will identify key needs that the new National Partnership should address and
recommend ways to supply the missing elements. Some of the recommendations
in this report are directed specifically to the National Biological Survey and some
to the National Partnership. The latter class also applies to NBS in its proposed
role as leader of the NPBS. The committee recognizes that various factors may
affect the specific form that the Partnership eventually takes but believes that the
functions and needs identified in its findings and recommendations are relevant to
any attempt to create a biological survey for the nation.
Recommendation 1-1: The United States, under the leadership of the
Department of the Interior, should establish a National Partnership for
Biological Survey. This will be a new national, multisector, cooperative
program of federal, state, and local agencies; museums; academic
institutions; and private organizations. The purpose will be to collect, house,
assess, and provide access to the scientific information needed to understand
the status of the nation's biological resources, the trends in the changes of
that status, and the causes of those changes.
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION30
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
PURPOSE OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
Some common weaknesses exist in the availability of information to address
the issues discussed above and later in this chapter. In some instances, data have
been collected but are not organized in useful ways. In many cases, data are
unavailable, have not been collected over a sufficiently long time for trends to be
separated from short-term variations, have been collected only in a few localities,
or have not been recorded in a format that can be used to make decisions about
the management, use, and conservation of the nation's biological resources.
Many national and local agencies and organizations have responsibilities for
understanding and managing the nation's biological resources, but there is no
effective cross-institutional framework for identifying and conducting research of
the highest priority, coordinating among current and future research activities, or
making information available in a coherent and usable way to the many agencies
and other organizations that have responsibilities for protecting, restoring, and
managing biological resources.
The National Partnership for Biological Survey, designed to remedy these
deficiencies and weaknesses, would have the abilities to generate new
information; to manage, analyze, and interpret the information through the
development and use of organized databases; and to communicate information in
appropriate and readily understood formats to a wide variety of users. The
purpose of the National Partnership is to develop the scientific basis for effective
protection, restoration, use, and management of the nation's biological resources.
More specifically, its objectives are to document and assess past and present
status and trends of the nation's biota and ecological systems, to predict future
trends, to analyze and interpret available data on biological resources, and to
provide information to those responsible for managing, utilizing, and conserving
those resources.
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION31
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
PARTICIPANTS IN THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
The institutions and other elements described below are obvious contributors
to the goals and objectives of the NPBS. The group is heterogeneous, and
participants will vary in the nature and extent of their participation. Many already
produce relevant information. Others have responsibility for major components
of the nation's biological resources and, in the opinion of the committee, should
benefit from developing or participating in programs and other activities that
contribute to information about these resources.
• Department of the Interior. DOI is the nation's largest land manager and
the steward of many of the wild living resources of the United States. It
also has wide-ranging hands-on responsibility for its trust lands and a
historically strong partnership with the states. Elements within DOI that
have important land-management responsibilities include BLM, NPS,
and FWS. The USGS will be especially important with respect to the
kinds of interdisciplinary research that will be critical for the success of
the National Partnership (see Box 1.1). Other bureaus have regulatory
responsibilities and pertinent expertise. All will need to interact closely
with the NBS and will be involved with the National Partnership as
users or participants.
• National Biological Survey. The NBS will provide scientific research
and information to help DOI manage the lands within its bureaus and
manage species for which it has legal responsibility (as well as lands
that affect either of the above); it is also the appropriate agency to
assume leadership and vision for the NPBS. In name and intent, the NBS
should be a catalyst for the National Partnership, providing a forum for
efforts to coordinate the actions of the participants in the NPBS.
• Other federal agencies. Several other federal agencies conduct programs
and activities that will be important elements of
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION32
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 1.1: THREE EXAMPLES OF THE IMPORTANCE OF
GEOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Geologic Habitat of the Mexican Spotted Owl in Santa Fe
National Forest, New Mexico
Some 113,000 acres were surveyed for Mexican Spotted Owls in the
Jemez and Cuba Ranger Districts of Santa Fe National Forest. A total of 18
territories were found. All core areas and roosting and nesting locations are
in canyons with steep cliffs. All nests were in cliffs in narrow canyons. No
nests or roosts were on mesa tops in either district. Foraging habitat is
diverse, ranging from mixed conifer with heavy overstory to open,
nonforested areas in an old forest-fire burn in the Jemez District. Nest sites,
especially in the Jemez District and the eastern portion of the Cuba District,
are in steep canyons exposing a volcano-stratigraphic unit identified by the
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) as the Otowi member of the Bandelier
Tuff. The Otowi member is 600 ft thick and is a nonwelded to densely
welded ash flow (incandescent avalanche) deposit, characteristically
containing abundant accidental pumice and lithic fragments. As mapped by
USGS, it includes 0-30 ft of basal, bedded, air-fall pumice. The steep
canyons, whose walls consist of Otowi, provide shelter, owing to deep
pockets formed in the canyon walls from the weathering out of large pumice
fragments. The deep pockets provide a cool nest in summer, warmth in the
winter, and protection from severe rain and snow storms. The single
exception to the Otowi outcrop association is a spotted owl territory in the
Cuba District in the Golondrino Diversity unit. Owls there also nest in
steep-walled canyons, but the cliffs are composed of sandstone with deep
joints (fissures). In the 1992 nesting season, a pair of the owls nested in a
tree adjacent to the canyon walls. These cliffs and canyons in the Jemez
and Cuba Ranger Districts can be classified as important habitat. The mesa
tops beyond a quarter of a mile on either side of the canyons can be
classified as potential foraging habitat.
Geologic Habitat of the California Desert Tortoise
To comply with the Endangered Species Act, Department of Defense
officials issued a contract to a consulting firm to determine the popula
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION33
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tion of desert tortoises on one of its bases in the Mojave Desert. Field
biologists went about the time-consuming task of trying to develop and
implement an effective method to count the tortoises. The fact that they tend
to burrow to escape the searing desert heat made the task difficult. After
many frustrating months, one of the biologists crossed paths with a
geologist who was studying earthquakes and environmental hazards in the
region. The geologist was using satellite images and geologic maps
covering the tortoise area. The biologists immediately noticed a spatial
correlation between concentrations of tortoises and what they termed "the
green splotches on the image." The geologist explained that "the green
splotches" represented a particular rock type (a unique metamorphic rock)
that weathered to soil more rapidly in the desert climate than outcrops of all
the other rocks that surround it. The geologist hypothesized that the tortoise
had defined its habitat on the basis of geology, reasoning that the need to
burrow had caused the animals to seek out readily "diggable" substrates.
Given this insight, the biologists went about the task of mapping tortoise
habitat in other areas of the military base on the basis of the images' ''green
splotches," thus saving substantial time and cost (R. Dokka, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, pers. commun., Sept. 1, 1993).
Geologic Habitat of the Red Hills Salamander
The Red Hills salamander (Phaeognathus hubrichti) is a plethodontid
salamander whose entire range is confined to a small area of southern
Alabama (Dodd, 1991). The salamander is federally listed as threatened
and prefers forested, steep-sloped ravines, and bluff faces for its habitat.
International Paper's Forest Environmental Quality Guidelines for managing
its habitat (adopted in March 1977) cover almost 30,000 acres of forest
located within the salamander's historic range and require periodic
population surveys.
During the company's soil survey of its southern ownership, soil
scientists examined this area in detail because of its unique geological
characteristics and the presence of this species. As the survey proceeded,
the scientists were able consistently to predict where salamander burrows
would occur on the basis of geologic formation and slope with
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION34
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
in the Red Hills physiographic province. This province consists of hilly
terrain of Eocene age that comprises two principal formations, the
Tallahatta and Hatchetigbee. The Red Hills salamander is found
predominantly in the Tallahatta Formation, which consists of claystone, gray
thin-bedded siltstone, and various yellowish gray sands and clays. When
the species is observed in the Hatchetigbee Formation, outcroppings of the
Tallahatta occur in close proximity.
In early 1992, a population survey was conducted in conjunction with
the Alabama Natural Heritage Program (J. McGlincy, W. Dennis, S.
Hindman, and S.G. Haines, International Paper Co., Bainbridge, GA,
unpublished material, June 3, 1993). The survey was designed to focus on
topography and geology identified in the soil survey as most likely to be
occupied by the salamander but also included a representative sample of
nontypical habitat. Ninety-two percent of survey sites occupied by the
salamander occurred on the Tallahatta/Hatchetigbee formations with slopes
of 30% or greater.
Soils underlain by or containing siltstone outcrops are the primary
habitat determinant. Such sites are typically forested with mature hardwood
or mixed hardwood-pine stands that occur on steep slopes. The siltstone,
which is moist and easy to burrow through, and the microclimate created by
the overstory provide the moist environment required for the salamander's
survival.
The integration of population, soil, geologic formation, slope, and
vegetative data permits a more refined characterization of preferred habitat
for the Red Hills salamander and its occurrence on company lands. This
ensures that the habitat is adequately protected during the course of
regular forestry activities.
the NPBS. Among them are the Forest Service and Soil Conservation Service in
the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), where the Agricultural Research
Service likewise has important capabilities in the taxonomy and inventory of
many noxious and pest species and their relatives; the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the Department of Commerce, which
has several units and programs concerned with marine and
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION35
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• coastal organisms and ecosystems; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
which issues permits for the development of wetlands and coastal areas,
constructs major public-works projects, and has extensive capabilities in
freshwater biology; EPA, which has broad environmental
responsibilities; the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
which is the lead agency in earth remote sensing, and is the largest
sponsor of national and international global-change research; and the
National Science Foundation, which provides grants for research into the
systematics, ecology, and evolution of the nation's biological resources,
making possible much of the research that takes place in universities and
freestanding research institutions throughout the United States, and
which also runs the Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) program.
EPA's Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP—
see Box 1.2) and the National Biological Survey are complementary
programs with different but related missions. Although it is beyond the
scope of this report to compare the two programs in detail, they clearly
need to work together. An examination of EMAP is being conducted by
another NRC committee which has issued an interim report (NRC,
1992).
In addition, the Department of Defense manages extensive land holdings
through all four of the uniformed services, and each carries out activities
pertinent to the National Biological Survey, pursuant to compliance with federal,
state, and local laws and regulations and in connection with the long-term
management of their lands.
• States. All 50 states have natural-resource agencies responsible for the
management of their fish and wildlife resources. Those agencies have a
statutory mandate to protect, preserve, enhance, and manage some or all
of the wildlife resources of the state for their esthetic, educational,
scientific, economic, and recreational value. The state wildlife agencies
have inventory and monitoring programs with substantial databases on
many species.
About 20% of the states have biological surveys of long-estab
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION36
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
lished (1836) to recent (1993) origin. The state surveys often have broad
missions and comprehensive research and monitoring capabilities that
are directly pertinent to the goals and objectives of the NPBS. State
natural heritage data centers, coordinated nationally by The Nature
Conservancy, exist in every state, although the organizational placement
of the program varies from state to state. This network provides detailed
information on endangered, threatened, and selected rare species, and an
ecologically based inventory of areas of special importance are found in
the state databases. (See Boxes 2.3, 2.4, and 3.2 for examples of how
that information is used.)
BOX 1.2: ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AND
ASSESSMENT PROGRAM (EMAP)
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has led the development
of a large program designed to monitor the nation's natural resources, the
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP). The EMAP
has several components, including a nationwide grid for systematic
collection of indicators of the status and trends of natural resources and
several pilot projects for selected terrestrial and marine ecosystems.
Several other federal agencies have participated in the EMAP as it has
evolved over the last 5 years.
Because the EMAP will provide information on the conditions of
natural resources, it will enrich the national database available to decision-
makers and the scientific community. Thus, the NBS will not subsume or
manage the EMAP, but will recognize that this program, like many others at
all jurisdictional levels, will collect and make available information that will
contribute to the goals of the NPBS. The NPBS will provide an
organizational framework for assisting in the distribution of EMAP-derived
information and for relating this information to other sources of data on the
status and trends of biological resources. DOI and EPA should work to
ensure that the NBS and the EMAP are properly coordinated.
• The Smithsonian Institution. The Smithsonian Institution has proposed
the establishment of a National Biodiversity Center to
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION37
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
help build its capabilities for dealing with biodiversity around the world,
including the United States. The institution has devoted much effort to
the development of specimen-based databases and is a national leader in
this field. It hosts the Biological Survey Unit staff of FWS, and the
National Marine Fisheries Service taxonomy groups, and systematists at
USDA. The National Museum of Natural History houses extensive
collections of organisms from the United States. The institution has the
potential to become a major contributor to the NPBS, especially if it is
successful in achieving the goals it has established for itself.
• Museums. Museums generally, as collection stewards, are the major
depositories of the biological specimens and associated data that
constitute a primary source for the NPBS. Large nongovernment
museums—such as the Missouri Botanical Garden, American Museum
of Natural History, Field Museum of Natural History, Bishop Museum,
New York Botanical Garden, Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, and California Academy of Sciences—are comparable
with the Smithsonian Institution in the size and importance of their
holdings and must be enlisted in the NPBS effort. Other large museums,
such as the Florida Museum of Natural History, are affiliated with
universities; they and such holders of extensive collections as the
University of Michigan, University of Texas, Ohio State University,
Cornell University, Harvard University, University of Kansas, and
University of California are important not only because of the size and
quality of their holdings, but because of the special and crucial role that
they play, in their university settings, in training scientists for efforts like
the NPBS. Museums and their scientific staffs are involved in
specimen-gathering, identification, collection management, research,
data development and analysis, and information dissemination. They not
only will be the repositories of the specimens gathered during the course
of pursuing the objectives of the NPBS, but should participate directly in
planning the research effort and other activities.
• Universities. Institutions of higher learning are a major
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION38
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
source of research on the nation's biological resources. Many are already
involved in collaborative efforts, such as DOI's Cooperative Research
Units and USDA's agricultural research programs. They are also the
chief source of training in the scientific disciplines and methods that are
crucial to an effective National Partnership.
• Nongovernment organizations. Some private organizations, such as The
Nature Conservancy and the National Audubon Society, are major
landholders, managing land for the conservation of biological diversity.
In addition, The Nature Conservancy has established a large-scale
database in connection with its Heritage Program, which deals with
endangered, threatened, and rare species throughout the United States.
Organizations with a similar purpose, which also operate databases,
include the International Joint Commission on the Great Lakes and those
dealing with important river basins and other habitats, such as the
Delaware River Basin. The Center for Biological Conservation was
established in 1993 by the Massachusetts Audubon Society to address
the problems of species extinction in New England. The formation and
funding of such organizations, which have an obvious role to play in the
NPBS, are to be encouraged.
• Cooperative programs. Existing national and international networks and
cooperative programs dealing with large components of the North
American biota should be parts of the NPBS. Examples include the
following: The Biodiversity Research Consortium—which brings
together FWS, the Forest Service, USGS, The Nature Conservancy, and
other groups—was organized by the EPA research laboratory in
Portland, Oregon, to develop the use of research information for
effective biodiversity management on a regional basis. Flora of North
America draws together current knowledge of the relationships,
characteristics, and distributions of North American plants through
collaboration among taxonomic and floristic specialists in universities,
museums, and government and private agencies; it makes this
information available on paper and in database form to a broad array of
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION39
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
users. The Center for Plant Conservation, a consortium of botanical
gardens, maintains an extensive database and acts directly to conserve
threatened and endangered plants in the United States. Partners In Flight
is described elsewhere in this report (see Box 4.1). The Freshwater
Imperative is an effort to promote interdisciplinary and institutional
cooperation to address issues and needs related to our understanding of
fresh-water systems in the context of environmental change; it is
represented by a coalition of scientists from government, academe, and
the private sector. CARICOMP (the Caribbean Coastal Marine
Productivity Program) is an international cooperative network of 20
marine laboratories in and near the Caribbean basin dedicated to
monitoring the status of coral reefs and associated environments
throughout the region.
• Native American groups. Native American lands in the United States
contain over 20 million acres of habitats, some with unique geological,
archeological, and biological resources. Many Native Americans are
highly knowledgeable about these resources and continue to depend on
them for survival. The lands, including those held in trust under DOI,
harbor endangered species, old-growth forests, rare communities, and
unique ecosystems that receive various degrees of management or
protection. Data on those resources will be an important part of the
information to be gathered by the Partnership, and the participation of
Native American groups is therefore necessary.
• Puerto Rico and U.S. territories and possessions. Important biological
resources exist in Puerto Rico, trust territories, and other lands and
waters under U.S. jurisdiction. Those resources—under a mix of federal
and local jurisdiction—should be accorded a high priority in the NPBS.
• Private landholders and user groups. Private landholders have a great
role to play in the full development of the NPBS; collectively, they own
most of the land of the United States (Figure 1.1). Ideally, they should
contribute to and derive much benefit from the NPBS in relation to the
sustainable use of their
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION40
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Figure 1.1
Most of the 2.3 billion acres of land in the United States is owned privately. Sources: Federal—National Fish and Wildlife Foundation;
Private, State, and Other—U.S. Department of Agriculture
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION41
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
lands. Many large industrial landholders already collect relevant
information. The associations representing the private sector—focused
on such groups as land-developers, home-builders, and the forestry,
mining, farming, and grazing industries—should find that the
information available as a result of the operation of the NPBS will add
greater certainty to planning for resource development and land use. A
chief role for them in the Partnership will be to help to coordinate the
relevant activities of their members.
• Individual scientists. Much of the critical research and detailed
knowledge necessary for the success of the NPBS has traditionally been
performed, generated, or held by individual researchers. Those
researchers might be professionals or informed amateurs; their
participation is vital to the success of the NPBS. They will need to be
fully engaged in the process, regardless of their institutional affiliation.
Their involvement should be sought, in part, through the wide array of
scientific professional societies—such as the Botanical Society of
America, the Ecological Society of America, the Society for
Conservation Biology, the Wildlife Society, and the American Fisheries
Society—and organized volunteer groups, such as the various Audubon
Societies and the Izaak Walton League.
• Foreign biological entities. Specialists best able to deal with particular
groups of organisms in the United States often reside in foreign
countries, and their assistance in pursuing the goals of the NPBS should
be sought vigorously. No country can house the best or only specialists
on all groups of organisms. In addition, special cooperation of the
biological surveys of Canada and Mexico and the specialists resident
there and in other areas next to United States holdings—such as Russia
for the Arctic Sea Region, other Caribbean basin and Central American
nations for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, and the nations of the
South Pacific for the U.S. possessions and trust territories there—are of
special importance. National and state or provincial agencies,
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION42
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
universities, and nongovernment organizations in all those and other
countries can contribute to the goals of the NPBS.
MAJOR ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED BY THE NATIONAL
PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
Major policy issues that can be addressed with the formation of the National
Partnership are reviewed on the following pages of this chapter. Dealing with
each of them effectively requires better, more consistent, and more readily
available scientific information about the organisms and ecological systems that
occur within our national boundaries.
Preserving the Nation's Biota
The United States is committed to attempting to preserve its biological
heritage. The national policy, as embodied in the Endangered Species Act, is to
prevent species from becoming extinct. The FWS implements the Endangered
Species Act and manages a diverse national wildlife refuge system. The Forest
Service is mandated to manage its lands to preserve viable populations of native
species over major portions of their ranges, and NPS is charged with conserving
the wildlife on its lands. NOAA has similar obligations for all marine species in
national waters. All federal agencies are obliged by the National Environmental
Policy Act to assess the impacts of their actions on the survival of the organisms
that occur on their lands.
Fulfilling those commitments requires accurate and extensive information on
the evolutionary relationships among species (Vane-Wright et al., 1991; Nixon
and Wheeler, 1992), their
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION43
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
biology, and the status and trends of their distributions and abundance. But such
information is often not readily available, and for many groups of organisms
(e.g., fungi, mites, nematodes, and marine invertebrates), most species have not
yet been described and named, even within the borders of the United States.
For many taxa, sampling methods are poorly developed. Life-history traits
and ecological requirements of most species are poorly understood, even among
the better-known groups. Our knowledge of microbial diversity is extremely
limited. Although the determination of gene sequences has made assessment
more feasible than in the past, the application of these methods remains in its
infancy.
Because the biological information available is often sparse or of poor
quality, threats to the viability of species are often not recognized until the
situation is serious and options are limited and expensive. Therefore, many of the
remedial actions undertaken are late, costly, and inadequate. The meagerness of
information also makes it difficult to determine what land can be altered for
economically beneficial purposes with the least threat to biological diversity.
Sustainable Use of Biological Resources
Biological resources—such as food, fiber, and medicines—will be
renewable for present and future generations only if they are used within
scientifically determined limits. Sustainable use depends on accurate knowledge
of the identity, distribution, and life-history characteristics of the species being
used and those with which they interact, as well as knowledge of the ecological
processes on which their existence depends. It is also important to understand the
biological impact of human activities, such as the expansion of metropolitan
areas and the extraction of nonrenewable resources. With more complete
information, optimum harvest levels and methods can be established on a sound
scientif
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION44
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ic basis, as is done successfully with some sport species. Those necessary data are
well established for few species; for most, they are virtually absent.
Maintenance of Essential Ecological Services
Natural environmental processes purify water, maintain air quality, regulate
hydrological cycles and flooding, and buffer the carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. Those ecological services can be replaced by technology only in part
and only at great economic and social costs. We need to understand these
essential services and the exact ways in which they depend on the richness,
diversity, and integrity of ecological systems, both natural and altered, and on the
individual species that make them up. Such information will also greatly improve
our ability to restore essential ecological services in degraded areas. Reliable
indicators of functional well-being are not available for most ecological systems,
so we typically cannot predict how or when ecological services will be
jeopardized by either human activities or natural processes.
Reducing Undesirable Effects across Ecosystems
Human activities in one location can produce undesirable environmental
effects elsewhere. For example, the use of fertilizers and pesticides on land can
pollute wetlands, rivers, ponds, streams, and coastal marine environments
downstream. That pollution can cause a decline in commercially, recreationally,
and ecologically important species or in ecological services. Likewise, low-
density metropolitan land use in the United States could contribute to the
decrease in the numbers of neotropical migratory birds in their wintering habitat.
Management and conservation of species and ecological services require greater
understanding of
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION45
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
the extent and consequences of functional links among ecosystems.
Management of Land and Water Habitats and Resources
Knowledge of the distribution and abundance of organisms and of their
ecological requirements and interactions is essential for scientific prediction of
the consequences of different patterns of habitat loss or alteration caused by
humans. However, such knowledge is commonly available for only a small
fraction of the vertebrate and plant species of a region and for a much smaller
fraction of species in other ecologically critical groups like fungi and many
invertebrates. Moreover, in many natural and managed communities, ecological
relationships among even common species are often insufficiently known. And
there is little broad understanding of the collective and specific impact of humans
on biological resources, whether that impact results from metropolitan growth,
renewable-resource uses, nonrenewable-resources extraction, or other sources. If
management decisions are based on detailed information for only a few highly
visible species, then costly and irreversible mistakes that adversely affect the
production of ecological goods and services are likely to occur.
Maintaining the Aesthetic Quality of Life
In a world populated only by people and selected species of plants and
animals that survive in degraded or developed environments, not only would
goods and services from our biological resources be reduced, but the aesthetic
experiences now provided by them would be drastically impoverished. Contact
with nature provides a valuable antidote to the intense pace of modern urban life
and is eagerly sought by an increasing number of people. Preserving ample
opportunities for a variety of high-quality
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION46
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
aesthetic experiences requires not only preserving species and habitats, but also
determining how individual species and ecological diversity contribute to the
quality of these experiences and how the impacts of people attempting to satisfy
their aesthetic needs influences that quality.
Anticipating Climate Change
Although the rate and extent of future climate change cannot be predicted in
detail, substantial change has occurred in past centuries and millenia, and future
change, whether or not it is triggered or exacerbated by human activities, would
have enormous economic impact. Therefore, it is prudent to understand the
biological implications of various levels of change. Ecological productivity and
the locations and species composition of ecological communities are among the
things likely to be affected. To anticipate the nature and intensity of ecological
changes that might be induced by climate change, information is needed on how
ranges of species shifted in response to past climate change, the extent to which
the species compositions of communities changed, and which species became
extinct during times of rapid climate alteration.
Information is also needed on the effects of increased atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases on productivity,
plant competition, and vulnerability of plants to pests and pathogens. Much is
known about the responses of young plants to altered atmospheric concentrations
of carbon dioxide, but too few experiments have been performed in the field
under different ecological conditions, and only relatively short-term information
is available for a limited number of ecosystems.
Prospecting for Biological Resources
People depend heavily on other species for food, chemicals,
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION47
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
fiber, structural materials, and energy. Most medicines, including the 20 with the
largest worldwide sales, either are obtained directly from organisms or are
synthetic versions of molecules first discovered in nature. For most of the world's
people, medicines are substances taken directly from nature.
Even so, enormous potential wealth might remain untapped. About 100
species of plants, of a total of about 250,000, provide virtually all the calories we
consume, either directly or indirectly (Prescott-Allen and Prescott-Allen, 1990).
Our ability to splice genes from one organism into another has enormous,
largely unrealized potential to increase the nation's pool of economically
important taxa. Methods still need to be developed to identify organisms with the
greatest economic potential as either sources or recipients of genetic material.
The application of biotechnology to marine systems is also of great potential
importance (Colwell, 1983). In general, ''biodiversity prospecting,'' which
depends on an organized and readily retrievable body of information about
organisms, is a rapidly developing field that will benefit greatly from the
operations of the National Partnership (for a recent review, see Reid et al., 1993).
Restoring Degraded Environments
Many environments have been seriously degraded by human activities. Soils
have been eroded and contaminated with toxic chemicals, species have been
exterminated or seriously reduced in abundance, and exotic species have invaded
and modified native ecosystems and reduced their ability to function in ways that
continue to provide environmental services. Restoring degraded terrestrial
environments to their former productivity will require accurate information on
crucial factors, such as soil-forming processes, effective methods to
decontaminate soils, and knowledge of which species can best establish
themselves on degraded sites and alter them to favor the growth and productivity
of other
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION48
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
species. In addition, improved methods are necessary for monitoring biological
communities to assess the degree of pollution of particular areas. The degradation
of coastal marine ecosystems is a widespread and growing problem, but our
knowledge of requirements for restoring degraded marine systems is even poorer
than for terrestrial ones.
DESIRED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NATIONAL
PARTNERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
The National Partnership could be effectively organized in many ways.
Regardless of the structure, several general principles should guide the
organization and management of all the work of the NPBS, and especially that of
the National Biological Survey, if it is to play the leadership role recommended
by this committee.
Ability to Conduct Credible Science
The work of participants in the National Partnership must be scientifically
credible if its information is to be used widely and with assurance in decision-
making and in developing a stronger information base for the management of
biological resources. The National Partnership must be
• Science-driven and guided by highly qualified scientists. Unless its
programs are designed, executed, and evaluated by highly qualified
scientists, the information generated by the NPBS will not be credible.
Indeed, the hallmark of the Partnership must be the uniformly high
quality of its science. Effective management of the nation's biological
resources—including protection, use,
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION49
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and restoration—depends on high-quality research and the judicious use
of the best scientific information.
Although the quality of the science must be driven by the standards and
criteria of the best research practices, the type and scope of research in the NPBS
will be driven by a new partnership of scientists and users. This new model
explicitly recognizes that the National Partnership will provide a framework for
organizing high-priority research in an integrated fashion across traditional
disciplines. Moreover, because the research will be used to enhance knowledge
about the status and trends of biological resources for the purpose of managing
them wisely, strong interaction is essential between the scientists who produce
the information and those who use it.
Ability to Conduct and Stimulate Appropriate Research
The NPBS will conduct and stimulate basic scientific research on the
patterns and processes of species diversity and on ecological systems. Such
research has proved to be a powerful approach to discovering fundamental
biological interrelationships. From such knowledge, predictions and
generalizations can be made about the protection, restoration, and management of
these ecological resources. The research program of the NPBS will focus both on
understanding biological resources and on stimulating and coordinating research
that holds special promise for yielding results that can serve important
management interests. To meet this need for a comprehensive research base, the
National Partnership should
• Be broadly based scientifically. The scales on which information from
NPBS will be applied will range from individual species to whole
regions and from short-term to long-term. The data will need to address a
broad range of issues, as described above. The range of information
gathered and interpreted must
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION50
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
be equally broad. This Partnership will require expertise in evolutionary
biology, population genetics, systematics, toxicology, ecology, and other
biological disciplines, supplemented with skills in the physical and
social sciences, statistical design and evaluation, and data management.
However, the great strength of the NPBS is that these traditional
disciplines will be brought together to focus on the nation's biological
resources in synergistic and synthetic ways. For example, NPBS must
have the expertise necessary to organize existing information and
stimulate research regarding human settlement patterns as they relate to
the status and trends of the nation's biological resources. These patterns
include the growth of metropolitan areas (where over 75% of the
population live), the use of renewable resources, and nonrenewable
resource extraction.
• Be broadly connected internationally. The National Partnership must
have the expertise necessary to design and conduct research, interpret
results and share them with decision-makers, and coordinate research
both within the borders of the United States and, as appropriate,
elsewhere in the world. The NPBS must be able to identify gaps in
knowledge, expertise, and research approaches, and it must seek to
rectify those deficiencies either directly or through the resources and
mandates of other organizations. Because the geographic distribution of
many species extends beyond our borders, strong links must be
established with the biological surveys of Canada, Mexico, Central
America, and the Caribbean basin. The scientific, management, and
conservation expertise of other bordering nations, such as Russia (for the
area surrounding the Arctic Ocean in particular) and the nations of the
South Pacific, should also be involved. The many species of vertebrates
(especially birds, fishes, and turtles) that regularly migrate beyond our
borders likewise need to be considered throughout the areas where they
range. To understand the historical origin, diversification, and
relationships among our nation's species, comparative research must be
done in the context of the worldwide groups to which they belong.
• Set priorities adaptively. The need for information is great
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION51
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and there are many potential users of it. NPBS must have a strategy for
its development. That strategy must set priorities among science
activities, and it must adapt to new information as it becomes available
and to newly identified needs for information. Priorities for the NPBS
must not be set discipline by discipline, but rather on the basis of a need
to synthesize information required for protecting, restoring, and
managing the nation's biological resources. Assessing the current status
of knowledge, identifying the most serious deficiencies, and determining
how best to gather information that will be of maximum use in guiding
further activities should be a central goal of the National Partnership.
Because of the many uncertainties and gaps in our current
understanding, the work of the Partnership needs to be planned to reduce
major uncertainties rapidly and to modify priorities and permit users to
change management strategies easily in response to what is learned
(Holling, 1978; Walters, 1986). Investment in such an adaptive approach
should permit substantial savings in the long term by reducing the risk
of costly management errors.
Organization for Program Continuity
Distinguishing important trends from normal variability in the dynamics of
biological resources requires long-term, broadly based information. Therefore,
the NPBS must have stability in the direction and financial support of its research
programs and the expectation of long-term continuity. Data on the status and
trends of the nation's biological resources become increasingly valuable as the
length of the record increases. Interruptions in the development and maintenance
of databases would seriously reduce their value for nearly every purpose to which
they might be put.
Ability to Provide Useful Information
The success of the National Partnership will depend in part on
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION52
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
its ability to communicate useful information in a timely manner. Therefore, the
information products of NPBS need to be user-friendly and adapted to a variety
of users. The Partnership will gather and manage very large quantities of data. In
raw form, those data will be difficult for many clients to use properly and
effectively, because the data will require analysis and synthesis and because the
form in which information is needed will probably be highly problem-specific.
Users will need data that vary widely in geographic scope, temporal domain,
habitat types, and taxonomic groups. They will use the information for many
purposes, including detecting patterns and processes in ecological systems and
individual species, detecting the status and trends of biological resources,
assessing economic and biological effects of alternative land-use decisions, and
making decisions about the protection, restoration, and management of resources.
As a leader and catalyst for the National Partnership, the NBS especially will
need to find various ways to make information available to many users and for
many different uses.
BENEFITS OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
This brief overview has indicated how information about the nation's
biological resources—to the extent that it is relatively complete, up to date,
scientifically accurate, and readily available—can be used to benefit the nation.
Information about the species that live within our boundaries and across our
borders, their historical relationships, and their life histories will form an
essential foundation for their effective management and the management of the
ecological systems of which they are a part. Information on the structure and
dynamics of the many ecological systems that provide important services is
essential for our future prosperity. Information on the ways in which those
services and material goods depend on individual species, biological diversity,
the locations and sizes of particular ecological systems, and their
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION53
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
sensitivity to natural and human-caused changes will support land-management
decisions and aid preparations for dealing with potential climate change.
We have concluded that the proposed National Partnership for Biological
Survey can make major contributions to our ability to develop and use such
information effectively. The benefits that will accrue from the formation of the
National Partnership can be emphasized most effectively by discussing them in
relation to five points, which in essence constitute a summary of the ways in
which the Partnership will be able to address the important issues that have just
been outlined. They include some of the most important ways in which the steps
recommended here will lead to improvement in our ability to maintain and use
sustainably the biological resources that occur within our borders.
An effective National Partnership for Biological Survey would
Provide a better and more efficient information base from which to make planning and operational decisions, thereby strengthening the quality
of such decisions and improving the management of biological resources.
The NPBS will identify, develop, and coordinate biological information from
many sources, making these sources readily available to decision-makers. The
information will remain in many localities and under the custodianship of
numerous individuals and organizations. However, under the auspices of the
NPBS, it will be cataloged and made accessible in a consistent format. Moreover,
as new information is acquired and made available, it will be identified as part of
the information base.
Provide, for the first time, an organized framework for collaboration among federal, regional, state, and local organizations, both public and
private, where much of the information resides and where many of the
decisions are made about biological resources.
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION54
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
The National Partnership will be coordinated and supported at the federal
level, with the National Biological Survey playing a key role, but it will include a
comprehensive structure that involves public and private organizations at all
jurisdictional levels. Thus, information will be exchanged in a network fashion
among many entities, and each one can contribute to and use it. In essence, NPBS
is a national effort that happens to be coordinated at the federal level.
Provide, for the first time, an organized structure with stated
priorities for inventorying and monitoring national biological resources,
for acquiring information on the status and trends of these resources, and
for understanding the causes of changes in them.
The purpose of the National Partnership is to develop the scientific basis for
effective management, use, and conservation of the nation's biological resources.
Prerequisites for accomplishing that purpose are to understand the location,
status, and trends of the resources; to comprehend their features better; and to
assess how human activities and natural processes cause changes in them. In
many cases, existing information can be identified and organized to serve these
purposes—for example, by the efficient use of museum resources. In other
instances, new information must be collected, analyzed, and made available. Not
all necessary information can be collected immediately, and the NPBS will need
to set comprehensive priorities for organizing existing information and for
collecting new data.
Provide improved programmatic efficiencies and economies of scale
through better coordination than is now possible with public and private
organizations.
Many public and private organizations collect, analyze, and use biological
information for making decisions about the management, use, protection, and
restoration of biological resources.
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION55
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Because there is inefficient coordination among these programs, there is
likely to be unnecessary duplication, as well as gaps in the necessary knowledge.
In addition, much information gathered for individual programs, such as
environmental impact statements, is filed and then effectively "lost" for all other
purposes. The NPBS will provide a framework for developing a continuing
assessment of the availability and quality of information and for efficiently
collecting, analyzing, and distributing new and existing information.
Provide an extensive and common information base that will be used to
anticipate and lessen potential conflicts about biological resources.
Many decisions about the management, use, and preservation of natural
resources are made in response to court cases or to avoid incipient crises. Many
of those decisions are expensive in both money and political cost. These
problems can be reduced both in number and degree of confrontation with the
kind of common, extensive, scientifically credible information base that the
National Partnership will develop.
THE LIMITS TO THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP FOR
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
The National Partnership for Biological Survey will serve the nation well as
it grapples with increasingly contentious and challenging issues in protecting,
restoring, and managing its biological resources. Nonetheless, the very richness in
biological resources that the Partnership seeks to describe and understand means
that decisions will always be supported by incomplete information. Current
information is spotty at best. But even with much more research and
coordination, decisions will always be based on incomplete information because
it is impossible to know
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION56
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
everything about any species or ecosystem. Moreover, values and economic
interests other than scientific ones inevitably influence resource management
decisions. Although the National Partnership would improve the scientific basis
for decision-making, hard choices and conflicts will remain.
In the United States, much biological information is collected, analyzed, and
interpreted locally and regionally, and the inclusion of this information will be an
important strength of the Partnership. Most environmental decisions are made at
state and local levels. Therefore, local, state, and regional nongovernment
programs must constitute a vital part of the Partnership. This comprehensive
structure of the NPBS will broaden and deepen the information base that supports
decisions about biological resources. However, decisions at all levels will be
made within the context of human value systems and political processes.
There is a risk that the label National Partnership For Biological Survey
would simply be applied to existing science programs in the federal government
and elsewhere. But the proposed NPBS has a very specific focus on knowing
species diversity and the distribution of biological resources, understanding the
patterns and processes that determine their locations and dynamics, measuring the
status and trends of these resources, assessing economic and biological effects of
alternative land-use decisions, and providing this information to users who must
make decisions about the protection, restoration, and management of these
resources.
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION57
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION58
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
2
