
ecies, populations, and
ecosystems; and providing the scientific support and technical assistance needed
for management and policy decisions in DOI. Thus, it includes far more than the
inventorying and mapping functions that the use of the word survey might imply.
The idea of a national biological survey has a long history in the United
States, beginning with the formation of the Division of Biological Survey in the
Department of Agriculture at the end of the last century. After that division was
transferred to DOI in 1939 and made part of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
the survey component gradually declined. But with concerns over loss of habitats
and species and calls for more effective regional land management, professional
organizations, nongovernment organizations, individual scientists, and members
of Congress have increasingly called for a new biological survey.
In February 1993, the Secretary of the Interior requested advice from the
National Research Council on the formation of the NBS. The National Research
Council thereupon assembled a committee that included both scientists and
persons with experience in government, industry, and public-interest
organizations. The Committee on the Formation of the National Biological
Survey conducted its study under the auspices of an ad hoc oversight body, the
Commission on the Formation of the National Biological Survey, drawn from the
membership of the Commission on Life Sciences and the Commission on
Geosciences, Environment, and Resources.
The committee worked from March to September 1993. Its timetable was
designed to accommodate the schedule that DOI set for administratively
establishing the NBS. The committee was charged with addressing issues related
to the scope and direction of the NBS embodied in the following questions:
• What should a biological survey for the nation entail?
PREFACE viii
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• What should the National Biological Survey in the Department of the
Interior be, if it is to serve the needs of the department and others?
• How should information relevant to the survey be managed?
• How can existing and new survey-related activities and information be
made most useful for policy, management, and scientific purposes within
and outside the Department of the Interior?
• How can federal and other entities best collaborate for these purposes?
It is important to note that the charge did not include a study of the question
of whether or not the NBS should exist on a detailed evaluation of DOI's specific
proposal, but rather the scope and direction of NBS in the context of the larger
national picture. In developing answers to those questions, the committee
considered a wide range of current and potential elements of a survey appropriate
to the Department of the Interior and other locations. Many of the activities of a
national biological survey—such as basic and applied research, monitoring,
inventory, and information management—are going on, not only in DOI but in
other federal agencies, such as the U.S. Forest Service, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the National
Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the
Department of Defense. Many of the activities occur in state agencies, state
biological surveys, universities, museums (including the Smithsonian
Institution), and private organizations, such as The Nature Conservancy's
Heritage Programs, which maintain inventory databases in state offices
throughout the country. There are also a number of international efforts, such as
the World Conservation Monitoring Center in England, and national efforts, such
as the Australian ABRS-ERIN (Australian Biological Resources Study-
Environmental Resources Information Network) complex and the biodiversity
institutes in Taiwan, Mexico (CONABIO, Comisión
PREFACE ix
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad), and Costa Rica
(INBio, Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad).
During its inquiries and deliberations, the committee discovered a wide
range of national needs, a broad distribution of relevant efforts and resources
already occurring in federal and nonfederal organizations in a relatively
uncoordinated fashion, and a wide range of management needs within the
Department of the Interior. These findings, combined with the short time
available to examine these programs and needs in preparation for this report, led
the committee to conclude that it would be more effective in fulfilling Secretary
Babbitt's wish that its work help provide a vision for the National Biological
Survey if it approached the first two questions above in the context of the broader
needs, opportunities, and activities as they related to the stated goals of the NBS
rather than concentrating on the details of its proposed structure or specific
research agenda, except to the extent that such an examination seemed essential to
deal with the broader issues.
This report proposes a research agenda for the National Biological Survey
that is far broader than the existing research effort in the Department of the
Interior but that is also focused and has priorities according to likely immediate
and long-term user needs. A National Biotic Resources Information System is
envisioned to make reliable biological information more accessible to diverse
users. The report also describes how the many public and private entities involved
in current research on biological resources can work together in a new entity,
which the committee has called the National Partnership for Biological Survey, to
provide comprehensive information that will be useful for decision-makers at all
levels of government and outside government. The recommendations of this
committee, if followed, should provide the United States with a framework for
making decisions about the management, use, and protection of its biological
resources.
While this report represents the work of the committee, it benefited greatly
from the support of professional staff from the National Research Council: Eric
Fischer, who helped the com
PREFACE x
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
mittee refine the report, and Deborah Stine who contributed to the preparation and
administrative organization of the study. Their resumes are included with those
of the panel in Appendix B because of their intellectual contributions, which
advanced the committee's efforts throughout the study. The report was greatly
improved by the diligent work of its editor, Norman Grossblatt. In addition,
invaluable support was provided by Paulette Adams, Robin Harp, Karen Plaut,
and Helene Mokhiber.
The panel also acknowledges with appreciation presentations made at
meetings of the committee by the following persons:
Senator Daniel Akaka, U.S. Senate
Randy Alberte, Department of Defense
Bruce Babbitt, Secretary of the Interior
William Brown, Waste Management Inc.
John Busby, Australian Environmental Resources Information Network
Faith Campbell, National Resources Defense Council
Peter Dangermond, Dangermond Associates
Paul Dayton, Marine Life Research Group, University of California, San
Diego
Pam Eaton, Wilderness Society
George Frampton, Department of the Interior
Jim Gosz, National Science Foundation
Kim Harris, The Nature Conservancy of Hawaii
John Heissenbuttal, American Forests & Paper Association
Elaine Hoagland, Association of Systematics Collections
Robert Hoffmann, National Museum of Natural History
Alan Holt, The Nature Conservancy
Stephen Hubbell, National Institute of Environment
Robert Irvin, National Wildlife Federation
Kenneth Kaneshiro, University of Hawaii
Ted LaRoe, Co-chair NBS Implementation Task force
Thomas Lovejoy, Science Advisor to the Secretary of the Interior
PREFACE xi
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Ed Martinko, Environmental Protection Agency
Alison Merow, Center for Marine Conservation
Alma Peaty, American Mining Congress
Max Peterson, International Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies
Clair Reiniger, Designwrights Collaborative Inc.
John Sawhill, The Nature Conservancy
Jorge Soberón, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico
Bruce Stein, The Nature Conservancy
Bob Szaro, USDA/U.S. Forest Service
Frank Talbot, National Museum of Natural History
William Weeks, The Nature Conservancy
Donna Weiting, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Donald Wilson, Smithsonian
Peter Raven
Chairman
PREFACE xii
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1
What Needs Will a Biological Survey for the
National Address?
3
How Can a Biological Survey for the Nation Be
Created?
5
What Are the Necessary Functional Capabilities of
the National Partnership?
8
How Will the National Partnership and the
National Biological Survey Strengthen the
Information Base for Planning and Operational
Decisions?
9
How Will the National Partnership Provide an
Organized Framework for Collaboration
Among its Participants?
13
CONTENTS xiii
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
How Will the NPBS Provide an Organized Struc-
ture With Stated Priorities for Acquiring
Needed Information About Biological
Resources?
16
How Will the National Partnership Provide
Improved Programmatic Efficiencies and
Economies of Scale?
17
How Should the National Partnership Be Imple-
mented?
19
What are the Limits to the National Partnership? 22
1 THE VALUE OF A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
FOR THE NATION
25
Purpose of the National Partnership for Biological
Survey
31
Participants in the National Partnership for Biologi-
cal Survey
32
Major Issues to be Addressed by the National Part-
nership for Biological Survey
43
Desired Characteristics of the National Partnership
for Biological Survey
49
Benefits of the National Partnership for Biological
Survey
53
The Limits to the National Partnership for Biologi-
cal Survey
56
2 SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL
SURVEY
59
Setting Priorities 60
Scientific Research on the Status of Biological
Resources
63
Detecting Trends in Biological Resources 81
Regional Collaborative Projects 90
3 MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF
NPBS CLIENTS
93
Information Needs 94
CONTENTS xiv
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Coordination and Management of Data and Infor-
mation
106
Information Management in NBS 112
NBS Coordination of a National Distributed
Database
115
Information Dissemination 117
4 COORDINATION OF THE NATIONAL PART-
NERSHIP FOR BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
123
Role and Functions of NBS 125
Coordinating the NPBS 132
Budgetary Considerations 140
Relationship to Recommendations of Other Reports 148
5 IMPLEMENTATION 151
Strategic Implementation Plan 152
Implementation Priorities in Personnel and Admin-
istrative Management
153
Implementation Priorities in Research and Inven-
tory Programs
156
Implementation Priorities in Data Management 160
Summary 162
REFERENCES 167
APPENDIX A: BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 173
APPENDIX B: EXCERPTS FROM FY 1994 BUDGET JUSTIFI-
CATION
181
INDEX 193
CONTENTS xv
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The idea of a national biological survey has a long history in the United
States, beginning with the formation of the Division of Biological Survey in the
U.S. Department of Agriculture at the end of the last century. After that division
was transferred to the Department of the Interior (DOI) in 1939 and made part of
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the survey component gradually declined.
In recent years, increasing concerns about the nation's biological resources
have led to calls for a new biological survey. Secretary of the Interior Bruce
Babbitt has recently initiated the process of forming a National Biological Survey
(NBS) within DOI. To create the new agency, the Secretary is combining
portions of the biological research and survey activities from DOI bureaus.
As identified in the department's FY 1994 budget justification to Congress,
the mission of the NBS is ''to gather, analyze, and disseminate the information
necessary for the wise stewardship of our Nation's natural resources, and to foster
an understanding of
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
our biological systems and the benefits they provide to society. The NBS will act
as an independent science bureau without advocating positions on resource
management issues and without regulatory or land and water development
authorities.''
In February 1993, Secretary Babbitt requested advice from the National
Research Council on the formation of the NBS. In response, the Committee on
the Formation of the National Biological Survey, was formed, consisting of
scientists and persons with experience in government, industry, and public-
interest organizations. The committee conducted its study from March to
September 1993. This timetable was designed to ensure that DOI received timely
advice on its activities.
The committee was charged with addressing scientific, functional,
information, and coordination issues related to the scope and direction of the NBS
in the context of the larger national picture. It is important to note that the charge
included neither an examination of whether or not the NBS should be established
nor a detailed evaluation of DOI's specific proposal. In addressing its charge, the
committee discovered a wide range of national needs, a broad distribution of
relevant efforts and resources already occurring in federal and nonfederal
organizations in a relatively uncoordinated fashion, and a wide range of
management needs within the Department of the Interior. These findings,
combined with the short timeframe, led the committee to conclude that it would
be most effective in fulfilling its charge if it focused on the broader needs,
opportunities, and activities as they related to the stated goals of the NBS rather
than concentrating on the details of its structure or specific research agenda,
except to the extent that such an examination seemed essential to deal with the
broader issues.
This report proposes a research agenda for the National Biological Survey
that is far broader than the existing research effort in the Department of the
Interior but that is also focused according to likely immediate and long-term user
needs. A National Biotic Resources Information System is envisioned to make
reliable
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
biological information more accessible to diverse users. The report also describes
how the many public and private entities involved in current research on
biological resources can work together in a new entity, which the committee has
called the National Partnership for Biological Survey, to provide comprehensive
information that will be useful for decision-makers at all levels of government
and outside government.
WHAT NEEDS WILL A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
NATION ADDRESS?
A biological survey for the nation will provide information that is critical for
addressing a number of issues:
• Finding ways to preserve the nation's biological heritage. Achieving this
goal requires extensive information on the current status and trends in
distribution and abundance of species and on relationships among
species, and an understanding of the ecological processes on which they
depend.
• Managing biological resources in a sustainable manner. Sustainable use
depends on accurate knowledge of the identity, distributions, and
ecology of the species being used and those with which they interact.
• Maintaining essential ecological services, such as water supply, flood
and erosion control, and climate amelioration. We need to understand
how natural ecological services operate and to what extent they depend
on the biological richness and diversity of ecosystems.
• Understanding the impact of human settlement patterns (metropolitan growth, renewable land use, and nonrenewable-resource extraction) on
biological resources. The impact of daily human activity has had and
will continue to have a great effect on the nation's biota.
• Maintaining contributions of our nation's biota to the aesthet#
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 3
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ic quality of life. We need to know how species and ecosystems
contribute to our quality of life and how patterns of human use affect
those contributions.
• Understanding the effects of climate change. To anticipate the nature and
intensity of ecological changes that might be induced by natural or
anthropogenic climate change, we need information on how past climate
change affected species and biological communities.
• Deriving new economic wealth from biological resources. Only a small
fraction of species have been tested for potentially valuable chemicals,
foodstuffs, or materials, and ecological information on the nature of the
natural products of wild species is fragmentary.
• Restoring degraded environments. Restoring environments that are
degraded by erosion, depletion, pollution, or the invasion of nonnative
species will require accurate information on the ecological and physical
processes affected by degradation and knowledge of which species can
best establish themselves on degraded sites.
Some common weaknesses exist in the availability of information to address
those issues. In some instances, data have been collected but are not organized in
useful ways. In many cases, data are unavailable, have not been collected over a
sufficiently long time for trends to be separated from short-term variations, have
been collected only in a few localities, or have not been recorded in a format that
can be used to make decisions about the management, use, and conservation of
the nation's biological resources.
Many national and local agencies have responsibilities for understanding and
managing the nation's biological resources, but there is no effective cross-
institutional framework for identifying and conducting research of the highest
priority, coordinating research activities, or making information available in a
coherent
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and usable way to the many agencies and other organizations that need it.
HOW CAN A BIOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE NATION BE
CREATED?
The National Biological Survey is a critical step toward assembling a
comprehensive assessment of the nation's biological resources, but it cannot by
itself come close to meeting the full range of needs and objectives in scientific
research, inventory, and information management that a biological survey for the
nation must fulfill. The NBS should therefore have a dual mission: to meet the
scientific research and information needs of DOI for management of the lands
within its jurisdiction and species for which it has responsibility (and geographic
areas that affect either of the above) and to provide national leadership and vision
for this comprehensive assessment. To achieve the best possible results, this
assessment must be a coordinated national effort at all organizational and
jurisdictional levels. This joint enterprise can be called the National Partnership
for Biological Survey. The committee therefore recommends the following:
The United States, under the leadership of the Department of the
Interior, should establish a National Partnership for Biological Survey
(NPBS). This will be a new national, multisector, cooperative program of
federal, state, and local agencies; museums; academic institutions; and
private organizations. Its purpose will be to collect, house, assess, and
provide access to the scientific information needed to understand the
current state of the nation's biological resources (status), how that status is
changing (trends), and the causes of the changes.
The mandate and mission of DOI make it the logical agency to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 5
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
lead the development and implementation of the National Partnership. The
department has broad research and management responsibilities for the biological
resources of the nation and strong links to key nonfederal partners, and by
initiating the formation of the National Biological Survey, it has already indicated
its willingness to take on a leadership role.
Although the National Partnership does not yet exist formally, many of its
elements do.
• The Department of the Interior (DOI) is the nation's largest land
manager and the steward of many of the wild living resources of the
United States. It also has a historically strong partnership with the states.
• The National Biological Survey (NBS) will provide scientific research
and information within DOI to help manage the lands and species for
which the department has responsibility.
• Other federal agencies should participate. Major partners should include
the Department of Agriculture (USDA), especially the Forest Service,
the Soil Conservation Service, and the Agricultural Research Service;
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the
Department of Commerce; the Department of Defense, including the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; the Environmental Protection Agency;
and the National Science Foundation.
• All fifty states have natural resource agencies charged with the
management of the state's fish and wildlife resources. Many states have
their own biological surveys. Natural Heritage Data Centers, coordinated
nationally by The Nature Conservancy (TNC), exist in every state.
• The Smithsonian Institution is a national leader in the development of
specimen-based databases and houses extensive collections of
organisms. It also hosts the Biological Survey Unit staff of the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service and biologists from NOAA and USDA.
• Museums are the major depositories of the biological specimens and
associated data that constitute a primary resource for the
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 6
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
NPBS. They are involved in specimen-gathering, identification,
collections management, research, data development and analysis, and
information dissemination.
• Universities have advanced programs in research and training in the
scientific disciplines that the National Partnership will require.
• Nongovernmental organizations include some major landholders,
managing land for the conservation of biological diversity. Several have
established databases on biological resources.
• Cooperative programs and existing national networks deal with large
components of the North American biota.
• Native American groups in the United States use and often manage lands
that contain over 20 million acres of habitats that harbor endangered
species, old growth forests, rare communities, and unique ecosystems.
• Puerto Rico, U.S. territories, and possessions contain important
biological resources under federal and local jurisdiction.
• Private landholders and user groups should contribute to and benefit
from the NPBS. Private landholders own most of the land in the United
States. The associations representing the private-sector—focused on
such groups as land developers, home builders, and the agriculture,
forestry, mining, and grazing industries—should find that information
from the NPBS will add greater certainty to future land-use planning.
• Thousands of individual scientists perform critical research and generate
and possess detailed knowledge necessary for the success of the NPBS.
• Foreign biological sources have knowledge and expertise that is
especially important in areas contiguous to U.S. holdings. No one
country can house the best, or only, specialists on all groups of
organisms. DOI and other agencies have special international
responsibilities relevant to the Partnership under various laws, treaties,
and agreements.
The major missing elements required to create an effective National
Partnership are some key programmatic components and
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
mechanisms for horizontal and vertical integration and coordination of the
ongoing independent efforts. The recommendations below are intended to help
provide these missing elements. Some are directed specifically to the National
Biological Survey and some to the broader Partnership. The latter class also
applies to NBS in its proposed role as a leader of the NPBS. The committee
recognizes that various factors may affect the specific form that the Partnership
eventually takes, but believes that the functions and needs it identified are
relevant to any attempt to create an effective biological survey for the nation.
WHAT ARE THE NECESSARY FUNCTIONAL CAPABILITIES
OF THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP?
To carry out its responsibilities, the Partnership, including NBS, must have
several specific functional capabilities. It must be
• Able to conduct credible science. The fundamental purpose of the NPBS
is to provide a rational and objective scientific basis for meaningful
stewardship of the nation's biological resources. The scientific credibility
and reputation of the Partnership are therefore of utmost importance.
• Able to stimulate and coordinate appropriate research. The National
Partnership should be broadly based scientifically. It should also be
broadly connected, both nationally and internationally, and its programs
should be designed to gather information that will be of maximum use in
guiding further activities.
• Organized for program continuity. Data on status and trends of the
nation's biological resources become increasingly valuable as the length
of the record increases. Interruptions would seriously reduce the value
of these data.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 8
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• User friendly and adapted to a variety of users. Users need timely,
accurate, and easily interpreted information that will vary widely in
scope and purpose. The NPBS will need to facilitate access to
information in a variety of forms for many different users and uses.
The National Partnership will provide new information and much more
powerful tools for managing, using, and preserving biological resources. It will
provide a stronger information base on biological resources, an organized
framework for collaboration and priority-setting, and economies of scale and
more efficient use of research resources.
HOW WILL THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP STRENGTHEN
THE INFORMATION BASE FOR PLANNING AND
OPERATIONAL DECISIONS?
Performing Research
One of the most important uses of the scientific information gathered by the
National Partnership is to assist decision-makers in addressing existing issues
about biological resources and in anticipating future ones. The National
Partnership should develop a strong, scientifically credible research program
designed to meet this goal.
The research of the Partnership should identify changes in biological
resources and determine why those changes are happening. It should identify
trends in a timely manner so that actions can be taken while multiple options are
available, determine how local actions influence events elsewhere, reduce the
chances of taking costly remedial actions unnecessarily, evaluate the
effectiveness of management decisions, and direct attention to areas
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 9
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
where problems are most likely to develop in the near future, such as urban
expansion zones, estuaries, rivers, and zones of intensive resource extraction.
Key scientific objectives of the National Partnership for Biological Survey
should include the following:
• Determining what specimens and data representing the U.S. biota exist in
the nation's institutional collections.
• Discovering, describing, classifying, and mapping U.S. species of
selected taxa.
• Establishing taxonomic specialists, collections, and databases for large
and important taxa.
• Studying the biology of selected species of importance.
• Developing classification systems for ecological units and a set of core
ecosystem attributes and protocols.
• Developing predictive models to facilitate sustainable management.
• Performing research on the restoration of degraded environments.
• Performing research to develop biological protocols for pollution and to
identify useful biological indicators of ecological trends.
• Establishing collaborative pilot projects for interdisciplinary research on
biological resources in selected regions of the United States. These
projects should target areas that are changing rapidly because of human
activity, have high biodiversity, have diverse co-occurring ecosystems
of different types, or are unique ecologically.
The committee believes that the scientific activities and programs of the
NBS should focus both on its responsibilities as the main biological research
agency within the Department of the Interior and on its proposed role as the lead
agency for the National Partnership. The large amounts of land managed by DOI,
along with the department's other responsibilities with regard to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 10
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
the nation's biota, make NBS especially important in providing key elements of a
program to assess the status and trends of biological resources. The committee
therefore recommends the following:
NBS should perform research needed for the management of lands
within the jurisdiction of DOI and species for which it has responsibility. It
should also ensure, both through its own scientific activities and its
proposed role of national leadership, that needed research is performed to
fulfill the central purpose envisioned for the National Partnership—to
generate the information required to understand the current status of the
nation's biological resources, how that status is changing, and the causes of
the changes.
The committee believes that DOI should work to ensure that needed research
is done by NBS or other entities no matter what specific form the Partnership
eventually takes. To fulfill its scientific mission, the NBS will need additional
staff in a number of scientific disciplines. It should perform a systematic
assessment of needs based on existing staff capabilities and program
requirements and develop and implement a plan to hire needed experts. This
should be the activity of highest priority for the application of additional budget
and staffing resources. Agencies whose participation is essential to the success of
the Partnership, such as the National Science Foundation, should receive
increased funding so that the Partnership can take full advantage of the nation's
relevant scientific expertise. Funding increases will also be needed for other
appropriate agencies.
Making Information Useful
One of the challenges for the Partnership is to communicate research results
effectively to resource managers, planners,
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
legislators, and regulators. These users have questions whose answers are not
obvious in existing research products. The NBS and others involved in the
Partnership should consult with users to find ways of disseminating information
so that it can be applied most effectively.
There is an urgent need to organize existing information and make it more
readily available and to coordinate future data collection and exchange. The
committee therefore recommends that
Under the leadership of NBS, the Partnership should develop a National Biotic Resource Information System. This should be a distributed federation
of databases designed to make existing information more accessible and to
establish mechanisms for efficient, coordinated collection and dissemination
of new information.
An effective National Biotic Resource Information System will require
substantial cultural and institutional changes to build stronger bridges among the
broad spectrum of producers and users of biological data. The NBS should take
the lead in promoting standards for biological-survey data and for meeting the
key requirements for an effective distributed database. It should collaborate with
other federal initiatives to develop national and global environmental databases
and should also support database development by states, museums, and
universities. The NBS will need to commit adequate resources to ensure that its
diverse user community receives timely dissemination of reliable, high-quality
data and information presented in a variety of formats.
The National Partnership should establish well-coordinated efforts to
develop standard sets of spatial data. For example, sufficiently detailed,
computerized maps of actual vegetation do not exist for much of the United
States. To remedy these deficiencies, the NPBS should participate in the National
Spatial Data Infrastructure; promote greater awareness and use of spatial data
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 12
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and technologies; increase efforts to locate field data spatially; adopt, where
appropriate, existing standards for mapping and spatial data handling; and
increase the role of biologists in efforts to develop standards for spatial data.
To meet the growing needs of all sectors of society for biodiversity data and
information, the NPBS should have a strong capability for publication and
product communication—increased online access to data, reports, and
bibliographies; publication of selected data sets on CD-ROM and other media;
and expanded publication of synthetic documents. The NPBS should produce
appropriate paper publications such as instructional materials, range and habitat
maps, atlases of distribution and trends in regional biodiversity, floras and
faunas, field guides and manuals, taxonomic monographs, and summaries of
surveys and trends. The most important paper publications will be peer-reviewed
scientific articles and reports.
Software tools must be responsive and readily accessible to all users. The
NPBS should expand efforts to develop tools for data visualization and analysis,
for data reformatting and conversion, for trend analysis of monitoring data, for
spatial interpolation of sighting and collection data, and for Geographic
Information System (GIS) habitat modeling.
HOW WILL THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP PROVIDE AN
ORGANIZED FRAMEWORK FOR COLLABORATION
AMONG ITS PARTICIPANTS?
Organization and Coordination of the NPBS
Coordination among its various participants is a key to the success of the
Partnership. Because it will be a national program that cuts across political,
jurisdictional, and geographic bound
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 13
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
aries, it will need a mechanism through which all sectors involved can advocate,
justify, and discuss proposed programs and activities that will affect them.
Because the scope and activities of the National Partnership are quite broad, and
because of the extensive amount of intergovernmental and nongovernmental
coordination required, the committee believes that no existing model for national
coordination is readily adaptable to the National Partnership. A unique and
innovative process is probably needed. It therefore recommends the following:
Formal mechanisms should be established for coordination among the
entities with responsibilities for the National Partnership for Biological Survey. The mechanisms should collectively exhibit the five characteristics
described below.
The coordination mechanisms should
• Provide for high-level, balanced input from diverse participants and
users into the development and implementation of the Partnership.
• Take full advantage of the federated structure of American government,
in particular the states.
• Have a clear lead organization with primary responsibility and authority
for fostering coordination.
• Provide for continuity of involvement by participants and users.
• Be designed to encourage active, voluntary participation.
Coordination among nonfederal participants might be accomplished via a
standing body of appropriate representatives. The link to federal programs could
be provided through the Secretary of the Interior. In the committee's view, what is
needed is a high-level forum for the discussion, development, and implementation
of policies and priorities for all nonfederal stakeholders in the National
Partnership, not merely an advisory body. The forum could identify and
recommend national (not solely federal)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 14
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
policies and priorities for biological-resource assessment (not management
decisions) and make recommendations for all segments of the Partnership, both
federal and nonfederal. It could also review NPBS programs for their
appropriateness to policies and priorities and recommend appropriate changes.
Recommendations for programs would be passed to the appropriate entity for
action and feedback. Each representative would work directly within the sector of
the community (e.g., museums, etc.) that he or she represents to implement
policies and priorities.
An effective mechanism for federal coordination might be an
interdepartmental committee on biological survey. Such a committee could be
chaired by the Secretary of the Interior and include the heads of key federal
departments and agencies involved in the Partnership. The mechanism should
provide cross-agency coordination of federal policies and participation in the
Partnership and it should identify federal-agency priorities for the conduct of
biological research and resource assessments. The interagency committee would
be both a forum for high-level policy discussion and coordination and a
framework for increased day-to-day interaction at the working level.
Appropriate mechanisms also need to be established to obtain scientific
advice for the Partnership and to ensure proper data management. These
mechanisms would identify priorities for research and protocols for surveys and
inventories; establish procedures for quality assurance in research and data
management, including the development of database standards; plan the
development of the NPBS data network; and develop recommendations for
ensuring access to data by public and private users. One way to obtain the
necessary advice and guidance would be to establish committees in science and
data management.
Coordination within DOI
The director of the NBS must be an acknowledged and respected
professional leader in the biological-science community
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 15
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and should be selected in a way that helps to ensure the scientific independence
of the agency. A chief scientist should be similarly appointed and should be free
of management responsibilities other than for the development of scientific
programs.
Much of the work of the NBS will serve needs within DOI. For example, in
many instances, a DOI land manager might require on-site scientific expertise.
Land-management bureaus should retain a small cadre of scientific expertise to
address unique site-specific and short-term biological resources issues and to
facilitate interaction between the bureaus and the NBS.
The secretary should establish an office in each state to facilitate joint NBS
activities and to provide a communication channel among state agencies, private
and individual participants, and federal agencies. This may be the most important
consideration for ensuring that the NBS achieves liaison with all possible
contributors.
Because a state organizational structure for the NBS is recommended,
neither the NPBS or the NBS needs alternative geographical bases. Nonetheless,
collection, analysis, and dissemination of data might, for some purposes, be
categorized by ecological criteria that do not necessarily correspond with any
political boundaries, such as watersheds, vegetation zones, or wildlife migration
routes.
HOW WILL THE NPBS PROVIDE AN ORGANIZED
STRUCTURE WITH STATED PRIORITIES FOR ACQUIRING
NEEDED INFORMATION ABOUT BIOLOGICAL
RESOURCES?
The NPBS research program should be well-balanced between the conduct
of new fundamental research designed to advance science and the conduct of
more practical research focused on near-term problem-solving. A robust national
biological research program must encompass the entire spectrum. Because the
NPBS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 16
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
must address many scientific needs and because the resulting information has
many uses, no single criterion can be used to establish priorities.
A strength of the NPBS is that multiple criteria for setting priorities can be
brought together under its coordinating framework. Priorities should be based on
the degree to which proposed research advances the following goals:
• Evaluation of biological resources that are demonstrably or potentially
important but for which relatively little information exists.
• Information required for the maintenance of biological diversity and the
long-term sustainability of ecological systems.
• Understanding of the status and trends of biological resources that are
changing rapidly, are rare, or are threatened by factors such as land use,
natural patterns or harvesting activities, or natural changes in the
environment.
• Information about biological resources that are identified as important
according to legal mandates or because of their current or potential
economic value.
• Understanding of ecological processes that provide services, such as
control of nutrient and soil loss, degradation of pollutants, and
maintenance of biological diversity.
• Conduct of studies whereby relatively small investments will yield large
returns in understanding.
• Information that will guide the remediation and restoration of damaged
or degraded ecological systems.
HOW WILL THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP PROVIDE
IMPROVED PROGRAMMATIC EFFICIENCIES AND
ECONOMIES OF SCALE?
Through its coordinating mechanisms and ability to set priorities, the
National Partnership can provide increased efficiency in
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 17
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
the use of scientific resources. Redundancies can be avoided or eliminated. Full
use can be made of resources. Collaboration among public and private
organizations can permit the development of projects that would be far too large
or difficult for a single organization. Investments made now to improve the
knowledge base should pay off in the future by lessening the risk of costly
political conflict and the need for expensive environmental repair efforts.
Research
Extensive biological research and inventory programs exist in several
federal agencies. The proposed coordination mechanisms will permit better
evaluation, prioritization and, where appropriate, reprogramming of current
spending on programs relevant to the goals of the Partnership. Where necessary,
the NBS should develop cooperative agreements. Effective leveraging of the
other federal programs will necessitate some funding increases in the NBS
budget to support these activities. Such increases in investment by the NBS will
be more cost-effective than undertaking large new programs.
Information Management
Much of the information generated by the Partnership will be exchanged
over computer networks through a distributed federation of databases, which will
be more cost-effective and efficient than a large centralized database. A federated
approach that takes full advantage of advances in information technology will
permit rapid, easy access to a wide array of databases distributed around the
country. To facilitate the sharing of data among participants, the NBS should
establish a facility for archiving and distributing regional and national data sets
and for meeting the goals of DOI's
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 18
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
new National Biological Status and Trends Program, which will be part of NBS.
NPBS data management should ensure that its databases coevolve with the
major federal environmental and socioeconomic databases to minimize
redundancy, to avoid conflicting terminology and classification systems, and to
maintain consistent data standards and formats.
HOW SHOULD THE NATIONAL PARTNERSHIP BE
IMPLEMENTED?
Implementation of both the NBS and the Partnership should be phased in
according to a well-planned strategy that provides for early results. The strategy
should identify specific near-term, intermediate-term, and longer-term priorities.
Otherwise, too many tasks might be initiated at one time, programs might be
started before clear goals have been established, and results might therefore fall
short of needs and expectations. The committee therefore recommends as
follows:
Development of the National Partnership and the National Biological Survey should be guided by a single strategic implementation plan developed under the leadership of the Department of the Interior with the
full participation of NPBS partners. Some proposed key elements of the
plan are listed below.
Near-Term Priorities (Immediately to within 1 Year)
NBS
• Appoint key leaders
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 19
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Phase in personnel transfers
• Assess existing national biological databases
• Identify priorities for additional information
• Assess collections
• Establish register of taxonomic specialists
• Develop national research plan
• Initiate regional collaborative pilot projects
• Establish data-management office headed by senior official
NPBS
• Establish national coordination mechanisms
• Develop FY 1995 budget initiative for DOI, NSF, and other agencies
involved
• Develop strategic plan for information management
• Develop national research plan
• Initiate regional collaborative pilot projects
Intermediate-Term Priorities (within 3 Years)
NBS
• Broaden mix of scientific disciplines
• Establish or expand research programs in environmental indicators
• Establish or expand research programs in inventories of areas rich in
biological diversity, unique ecosystems, and potential candidate areas
for restoration
• Develop series of manuals, monographs and atlases and system of
ecological classifications based on attributes
• Establish moderate-size data-management facility
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 20
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
NPBS
• Develop multiyear authorization
• Establish national data network
Long-Term Priorities (within 5 Years)
NBS
• Develop strong capability in ecological analysis
• Broaden scientific priorities to include research efforts in restoration
biology
• Expand inventories
• Develop predictive models
• Fill information gaps
NPBS
• Develop programs to deploy new information technology
• Evaluate data-management programs.
Although priorities might change over time, the committee believes that
phasing the steps outlined above according to a well-planned strategy will lead
