SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY
It follows from the considerations in Chapter 1 that a continuing assessment
of the biological resources (species, communities, and ecosystems) of the United
States will ultimately benefit the nation in many ways. The body of information
that will be developed by the National Partnership for Biological Survey will help
the country to meet many objectives and address such issues as the preservation
of biota, the maintenance of ecosystems, and the sustainable use of biological
resources.
One of the most important uses of the scientific information gathered by the
National Partnership will be to assist decision-makers in addressing existing
biological resource issues and anticipating future ones. The research activities
discussed in this chapter are essential for gathering scientifically reliable
information to support the decision-making process. Decisions based on
inadequate, unreliable, or incorrect information can be unwise and costly. The
chapter first reviews general criteria for setting priorities and then discusses
strategies for conducting research on the species of plants, animals, fungi, and
microorganisms of the
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY59
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
United States; the communities and ecosystems in which they occur; and the
trends that affect the distribution and abundance of populations of individual
species and of communities and ecosystems. As in all work of the National
Partnership, success will require the extensive cooperation of scientists of many
disciplines and from many institutions. Later chapters address the information
needs of users and mechanisms to coordinate and manage the work of the
Partnership.
Three themes will be emphasized here and in later chapters. First, priorities
must be set for much research on biological resources in a new way that is more
directly responsive to our nation's needs for better conservation, management, and
sustainable use of those resources. Second, inventory, monitoring, and other
research activities must expand beyond traditional, disciplinary lines to
encompass well-designed, large-scale, interdisciplinary research initiatives on
selected taxa, ecosystems, and geographic regions. Third, new interdisciplinary
research initiatives must be explicitly designed to investigate functional
relationships across different levels of biological organization, different spatial
scales, and different temporal scales; the research needs to range from microsites
to ecoregions, from individuals to higher taxonomic groups united by a common
history, and from days and weeks to geological epochs. These initiatives will
need to involve geological, hydrological, atmospheric, social, and other sciences
as well as various areas of biology. The need for interdisciplinary environmental
research has also been recognized by other NRC committees (NRC, 1990,
1993b).
SETTING PRIORITIES
There will always be more scientific questions to be addressed and more
environmental concerns to be met than available human and financial resources
can support. Therefore, priorities must be set.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY60
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
No single criterion can be used to establish these priorities. Many scientific
needs exist within the National Partnership and among its clients, and the
information produced and managed by the NPBS will have many uses. But one
of the strengths of the Partnership is that multiple criteria for setting priorities can
be brought together. Potential priorities can be comprehensively evaluated, and
individual agencies and organizations can take specific responsibility for
addressing them.
Priorities for the National Partnership should be based on the degree to
which proposed research advances one or more of the following goals:
• Understanding the status and trends of biological resources that are
changing rapidly, are rare, or are threatened by such factors as
metropolitan growth, renewable land use, nonrenewable-resource
extraction, and natural changes in the environment.
• Learning about biological resources that are identified as important by
legal mandates or for economic reasons, such as their status as possible
sources of new products.
• Performing research that will guide the remediation and restoration of
damaged or degraded ecological systems.
• Evaluating biological resources (species, groups of evolutionarily related
species, communities, ecological systems, and landscapes) that are
clearly important for science and society but for which relatively little
information exists.
• Doing studies that might lead to the maintenance or enhancement of
biological diversity and to the long-term sustainability and functional
integrity of ecological systems.
• Understanding ecological processes that provide services, such as
control of nutrient and soil loss, assimilation and degradation of
pollutants, and maintenance of biological diversity.
• Converting small investments of human and financial resources to
relatively large returns in understanding of the status and trends of
biological resources.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY61
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Several general considerations are important in developing priorities. An
examination of existing records concerning the past geographic occurrence and
condition of species and ecological systems provides a context in which to
measure their current status and trends. The same is true for the examination of
past management experiences or studies, especially if the information has been
gathered in a standard way and is documented (NRC, 1986). For example, the
projects for which environmental impact statements are written are potentially
valuable experiments, but they are usually treated as one-time sets of
observations, rather than as predictions of the consequences of planned
manipulations. As a result, there is usually no monitoring to determine the effects
of the projects. Such information would be of special importance in remediation
and restoration, and those projects are often the only way to generate such
information. Finally, priorities should be chosen to enable the National
Partnership to carry out its work efficiently and cost-effectively.
The committee believes that the scientific activities and programs of the
NBS should focus both on its responsibilities as the main biological research
agency within the Department of the Interior and on its proposed role as the lead
agency for the National Partnership. The large amounts of land managed by DOI
(Fig. 1.1), along with the department's other responsibilities with regard to the
nation's biota, make NBS especially important in providing key elements of a
program to assess the status and trends of biological resources. The committee
therefore recommends the following:
Recommendation 2-1: NBS should perform research needed for the
management of lands within the jurisdiction of DOI and species for which
it has responsibility. It should also ensure, both through its own scientific
activities and its proposed role of national leadership, that needed research
is performed to fulfill the central purpose envisioned for the National
Partnership—to generate the information required to
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY62
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
understand the current status of the nation's biological resources, how that
status is changing, and the causes of the changes.
Given the wide range of national needs identified in Chapter 1, the broad
distribution of relevant research efforts in federal and nonfederal organizations,
the wide range of management needs within the Department of the Interior, and
the short time available to examine these programs and needs in preparation for
this report, the committee believed that it would be most helpful by focusing its
attention on research needs at the level of the National Partnership rather than
concentrating on specific recommendations for NBS research activities. For this
reason, most of the recommendations in this chapter apply to the Partnership as a
whole and not specifically to the NBS or other participants. However, the
committee recognizes that many factors will influence the formal creation of the
proposed National Partnership and believes that DOI should work to ensure that
needed research is done by NBS or other entities no matter what specific form the
Partnership eventually takes. The recommendations below provide a general
framework to help members of the National Partnership to develop their research
programs, but more detailed examination, based on this framework, of research
needs and priorities of key participants, including the NBS, could be usefully
performed by an independent group of experts.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON THE STATUS OF BIOLOGICAL
RESOURCES
If the National Partnership for Biological Survey is to realize its purpose, it
must greatly strengthen our understanding of the distributions and the factors that
govern the distributions of species and higher taxa, communities, ecosystems,
landscapes, and marine realms of the United States. To achieve that goal, the
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY63
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
work of the Partnership should meet the following objectives in assessing the
status of the nation's biological resources:
• To determine the identities and distributions of species that live in the
United States. Discovering, describing, and classifying these species
will make possible the accurate and efficient identifications needed for
many purposes by decision-makers, scientists, and other users. Species
need to be understood in the context of their groups, and that
understanding necessitates broad, comparative studies of the species in
these groups and access to large, representative collections. For species
whose geographic ranges extend beyond the United States, information
is needed about their distributions in other countries.
• To use knowledge of relationships among species to produce predictive classifications. A classification that accurately reflects the relationships
among species should improve our ability to predict which species are
likely to have particular properties, even if they have not yet been
studied in detail (Wheeler, 1990).
• To determine the physical and biological factors that govern the
distributions of species. Management and conservation decisions
affecting particular species are problematic in the absence of information
about such basic aspects of their biology.
• To understand the population biology of species selected for intensive study, management, or conservation. Detailed understanding of the
biology of populations will permit predictions about the consequences
of decisions that lead to expansion or contraction of the geographic
ranges of species.
• To determine the types and locations of communities and ecosystems in
the United States. Management strategies that deal explicitly with
ecological units require accurate distributional information for these
units.
• To determine the factors that govern the distributions of communities and ecosystems. Unless the factors that shape and limit the distribution
of individual communities are known, decisions intended to manage
them sustainably might prove ineffectual.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY64
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• To understand the effects of human settlement patterns (metropolitan growth, renewable land use, and nonrenewable-resource use) on
species, communities, and ecosystems. Much of the current decrease in
biological diversity in the United States is concentrated at the rapidly
expanding urban-rural interface. Research is needed on the effects of
suburbanization on biological resources, and on ways of reducing or
mitigating these effects, and on the levels at which settlement can
coexist with viable ecosystems.
What Species Occur in the United States? Where Do They
Occur? How are They Related?
We need to know what species live in the United States, where they live, and
how they are related to one another in an evolutionary sense. Modern
classifications reflect patterns of common ancestry and can be helpful in
predicting the occurrence of properties of poorly known organisms. Although no
substitute for research on individual species, they are thus vital tools in the search
for and management of biological resources and provide a frame of reference for
biological research. For example, botanists can use classifications to decide
where to search for chemicals of potential value to industry and medicine, and
entomologists can use them to predict which parasites hold promise for the
control of agricultural pests.
The United States has unparalleled taxonomic research capabilities in its
public and private museums, botanical gardens, universities, and government
agencies. In general, taxonomic research has not been focused specifically on the
goals that the NPBS will fulfill, but the Flora of North America, Moths of North
America, Birds of North America, similar current projects, and state biological
surveys are important examples of the kind of taxonomic research that the
National Partnership should perform. Australia (see Box 2.1) and Costa Rica have
established national organi
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY65
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 2.1: ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
NETWORK: AUSTRALIA'S RESPONSE TO THE NEED FOR
ACCESS TO NATIONAL BIOLOGICAL SURVEY DATA
Australia has pioneered a two-pronged approach to surveying and
monitoring its flora and fauna. Within the Australian National Parks and
Wildlife Service, the Biodiversity Directorate administers the Australian
Biological Resources Study (ABRS), the purpose of which is to collect and
document information on the biota of Australia. The Environmental
Resources Information Network (ERIN) Directorate is responsible for
developing an information-management system and for assembling data on
the flora and fauna and analyzing them for management purposes.
ABRS maintains editorial centers for its flora and fauna series and
provides grants to taxonomic specialists to undertake the research
necessary to classify and describe the plants, animals, and microorganisms
of Australia. The grants address the highest-priority needs and are in the
form of binding contractual agreements that specify products and a delivery
schedule. This scheme ensures that careful scientific work will be done in a
timely manner and that scientific attention is focused where it is most
needed.
ERIN's mission is to provide geographically related environmental
information of an extent, quality, and availability required for planning and
decision-making. ERIN contracts with taxonomic specialists and uses data
from the flora and fauna series to create its backbone of taxonomic
information. It contracts with institutions that maintain biological collections
to computerize data on the identities and places of collection of those
specimens. This information is brought together with information on
physical properties of the continent—climate, topography, soils, etc.—and
with information on vegetation, ownership, and conservation status through
geographic information systems (GISs). ERIN has developed computer
programs that can predict how a species' distribution might change if
average temperature increases or decreases; its programs can show
correlations among species distributions; and its system can model
expected impact on a species' distribution and population viability if part of
its habitat is lost, for instance, through development. Individual institutions
and specialist groups take responsibility, as custodians, for the quality and
reliability of data made available to ERIN. Data standards have been
established cooperatively between ERIN and the custodians to facilitate
data transfer and sharing.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY66
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ERIN has several large-scale data-analysis projects. One is the
Landcover Project, which aims to collate data on the distribution of species
that make up the dominant groups of plants in the Australian landscape.
Another project is the Murray-Darling Basin Project, which is reviewing the
availability of environmental data for the area, defining the major
ecosystems of the basin and assessing the relationship between the
ecosystems and conservation reserves, and developing a strategic plan for
the conservation of the ecosystems. A third project is the National Marine
Information System, a comprehensive computerized marine-science
information base that will include significant data on all aspects of Australian
marine environments, including fisheries, mineral resources, ocean currents
and climate, and the distribution of marine life around the Australian
coastline.
By bringing together the expert knowledge of its biologists, the
information held in its rich museum collections, and the innovative and
focused use of data-management, analytical, and mapping computer
programs, the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service has
assembled a powerful and far-reaching tool for understanding and
managing its natural resources.
zations to study and document biodiversity. Their experiences suggest that
even small investments in taxonomic research can yield results of importance to
decision-makers.
Recommendation 2-2: The National Partnership should determine
what specimens and data representing the U.S. biota exist in the nation's
institutional collections, both public and private.
Specimen collections are useful for many purposes (see Box 2.2). The large
holdings in the United States should be studied and assessed, and the resulting
information should be synthesized and made available. By taking stock of the
information already available, scientists will be able to find the gaps in our
knowledge and take steps to fill them. Some groups of organisms are poorly
represented in collections and poorly understood. Examples
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY67
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 2.2: COLLECTIONS
Within public and private institutional collections in the United States
are millions of specimens that document two centuries of exploration of our
country and contain a rich trove of information about our flora and fauna.
Such specimens are usually parts of organisms (a branch of a tree, a blood
sample from a bird), entire animals or plants, or a number of individuals from
a population. They are accompanied by information about where and when
they were collected, what the place was like, and what other organisms
were present. The specimens and their associated data give insight into the
ideas of the researchers who have studied them. Collections of specimens
are a critical component of the NPBS. In all but a few well-known taxa,
identifications of species must be based on voucher specimens, without
which frequent misidentifications are certain to be made. Faulty
management decisions are likely to result from incorrect identifications.
Collections are the repository for most of what we know about species
diversity and are constantly pressed into use for new and often unexpected
purposes. The tissues and organs of collected organisms may contain
valuable information about the environment at the times they were
collected. For example:
• Specimens collected 100 years ago can give an indication of what kinds
of plants and animals lived at the place of collection then, what the soil,
water, or climate was like, etc. By comparing historical and current
collections, it is possible to monitor change in conditions. For instance,
the decline in fresh-water mollusks in Pennsylvania was demonstrable
only because of the existence of specimens collected over many
decades from diverse sites.
• Knowledge of the concentrations of mercury occurring naturally in fish
ruled out pollution as the source of the mercury, because the specimens
were collected before pollution began.
• Many specimens have been studied by specialists over the years and
provide documentation for their own research. As researchers try to
identify newly collected samples, they can use these vouchers to
determine how well new samples fit within the range of variation for a
given species as it was understood by earlier specialists. Vouchers are
kept for samples used in chemical, ecological, or other kinds of studies
so that later researchers can confirm the identity of the samples used.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY68
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Specimens for a given species, genus, or family that have been collected
from throughout the geographical area where the group occurs make it
possible to compare variation in characteristics of that group from place
to place or over time. Plant breeders can search for specimens of a
given species with some desired characteristic, such as larger tubers or
earlier flowering times, and learn where plants with that characteristic
grow and under what conditions.
• Samples of organisms are preserved so as to retain the most information
possible. Often, they are simply air-dried; sometimes, they are liquid-
preserved or frozen. It is possible to analyze the chemical contents of the
specimens; with new techniques, the DNA of century-old and
irreplaceable specimens can be probed. Changes in the chemical
components of habitats can sometimes be monitored, as well. For
instance, collections of egg shells of birds were useful in learning about
the effects of DDT.
Natural history collections contain information that is invaluable to our
understanding of biodiversity, its history, its current status, and its future.
They are an essential resource for the study and management of the
biodiversity of our nation.
include mites, nematodes, many groups of fungi, and marine invertebrates.
For bacteria, DNA or RNA probes might reveal the extent of diversity, but these
organisms are poorly known. Collections of bacteria in culture are indispensable
for the further understanding of the group. Even for such well-known groups as
plants and vertebrates, there are geographic gaps in our knowledge, and the
available records might not have been gathered recently enough to indicate the
present status of individual species.
Precise knowledge of what materials and data already exist will facilitate the
timely provision of information to those who need it and will help scientists to
identify gaps that warrant research. Tens of millions of specimens and facts have
been accumulated through more than two centuries of exploration of the
biological
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY69
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
diversity of the United States. However, because of the immensity of the
country's collections and how they are dispersed, management of this information
was impractical before the existence of modern computer technologies. The
NPBS, with the NBS taking the lead, should assess, as rapidly and completely as
possible, what we now know about the distribution of species in the country on
the basis of records of collections. It should also determine the importance of this
information for current and future research efforts.
Recommendation 2-3: The NPBS should discover, describe, classify, and
map U.S. species of selected taxa.
The National Partnership should go beyond an inventory of information and
collections and take decisive and forward-looking actions to fill important gaps
already known to exist in our knowledge of U.S. biological resources. Taxa
should be chosen on the basis of their economic, societal, or scientific importance
and the length of time required to complete the task. Among those appropriate for
immediate study are terrestrial, fresh-water, and marine vertebrates (all classes);
plants (bryophytes and vascular plants); macrofungi; and selected fresh-water,
marine, and terrestrial invertebrates (mollusks, crustaceans, mosquitoes, beetles,
butterflies, moths, spiders, and ticks). Special attention should be given to taxa
that occur in the areas where regional collaborative pilot projects are established
(see Recommendation 2-13).
More complete species inventories and classifications for selected taxa will
support environmental research of both immediate and long-term priority. For
example, vertebrate, plant, fungus, and arthropod surveys in old-growth forests of
the Pacific Northwest would improve the scientific basis for policies related to
resource use and conservation. In such inventory work, special attention should
be given to preserving specimens for DNA, protein, and other analyses that are
particularly useful for evaluating relationships but are not usually possible with
older specimens.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY70
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
The Department of the Interior should initiate studies that pertain to its
missions, including vertebrates, plants, fungi, and arthropods. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) should sponsor research through the Forest
Service on taxa that occur in forest lands, committing an appropriate portion of
its resources to address private-forest issues, and it should substantially increase
support for its systematics-research laboratories (especially those studying fungi
and insects). The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
should extend its research efforts to include noncommercial marine fishes and
increase its survey, inventory, and taxonomic research efforts on marine
invertebrate groups. The National Institutes of Health, the Department of
Defense, USDA, and the Department of Energy should conduct or sponsor
research on mosquitoes, ticks, and other vectors of disease and on potential
sources of medicines, feedstocks, biomaterials, and foods.
Recommendation 2-4: Taxonomic specialists, collections, and
databases should be established for large and important taxa for which
research resources are inadequate, including taxa that live in terrestrial
environments (e.g., fungi, nematodes, and arthropods), marine
environments (e.g., polychaetes, crustaceans, and mollusks), and freshwater
environments (e.g., protists, mollusks, and other invertebrates).
The United States needs to have specialists in all major and important taxa
and on taxa for which no experts exist throughout the world. Species of many
large and ecologically or economically important groups are unknown or
currently unidentifiable because of a lack of relevant expertise. Clearly, an
adequate scientific research program must include the training of specialists,
support of surveys and taxonomic research, and the building of comprehensive
collections of diverse taxa.
Our lack of knowledge of microorganisms and invertebrates, which are
estimated to make up as much as 88% of all species, seriously hampers our ability
to understand and manage ecosys
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY71
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tems. Fungi and arthropods associated with nutrient cycling in forests, for
example, are only poorly known. For many parks and other protected areas, such
groups as fungi and lichens, for which there are few available specialists, are little
known or understood. Organisms that prey on or infect insects hold promise for
cost-effective and environmentally benign control of insect pests, but the relevant
parasitic wasps, nematodes, fungi, and protozoans have been little studied.
Important proposals have been made to address this deficiency on a global scale
(e.g., Hawksworth and Ritchie, 1993), and our national programs ought to be
integrated with such efforts and constructed so to support them.
Our lack of information on marine habitats is also critical. Of the 70 phyla
of living organisms, 43 are either exclusively marine (20) or partially marine
(23), but gaps in our taxonomic knowledge of many groups of marine organisms
are numerous and broad (Ray, 1988).
For fungi, algae, and bacteria, which are critical in the functioning of
ecosystems, organizations that maintain living collections, such as the American
Type Culture Collection, should be supported. The functioning of the multi-
billion-dollar biotechnology effort in the United States alone demands the
maintenance of such facilities and underscores the need to add to their collections
rationally and aggressively. From a scientific point of view, this approach
constitutes the only way to gain an adequate, comparative, verifiable
understanding of the groups involved. In a more general sense, the living
collections of botanical gardens, zoos, and insectaria are comparable, and such
groups as the Center for Plant Conservation, which assembles genetically
adequate samples of the threatened and endangered plants of the United States,
ought also to be encouraged and supported.
Why Do Species Occur Where They Do?
Surveys of species distribution, abundance, and population
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY72
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
structures provide only part of the information necessary for managing the
nation's biotic resources. An understanding of ecological requirements of species
is also needed for their management, protection, and restoration, as well as for
developing models that can be used to predict their likely distributions and
responses to environmental changes. We need basic knowledge of the natural
history of species, their patterns of genetic variation, habitat requirements,
interactions among widely separated populations, life-history characteristics,
feeding habits, reproductive biology, interactions with pollinators, predators and
competitors, and vulnerability to anthropogenic disturbance and habitat
fragmentation.
Because detailed biological information would be desirable for hundreds of
thousands of species, adopting criteria for determining the order in which species
are chosen for study is crucial. Species can be selected on the basis of whether
they might be ecological indicators; are important to the functioning of
ecosystems; represent distinct phylogenetic (evolutionary) lineages; represent
taxa that are believed to be declining; have potential or demonstrated economic,
scientific, or societal worth; or are at the margins of their geographic
distributions. For example, although details of projected climate change due to
carbon dioxide emissions cannot be predicted, monitoring populations at the
extremes of their distributions might permit early detection of the effects of
potential climate change. A high priority should therefore be placed on
establishing baseline data on the current status of indicator taxa at range
extremes.
The National Biological Survey should perform research on ecological
requirements for taxa from ecosystems of current national concern (e.g., Pacific
Northwest old-growth forests or coastal estuaries) and from diverse, biologically
significant ecosystems (e.g., native forests of Hawaii or unique areas within our
national parks, such as the Great Smoky Mountains National Park). USDA should
lead research on taxa that fall within its mission, such as agriculturally important
insect and plant pests, such beneficial species as pathogenic nematodes and
predatory
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY73
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
insects, and introduced species; the national forests should be of primary
concern. NOAA should target both marine fishes and little-known marine
invertebrates for detailed study; for example, the recent decline of Caribbean reef
corals, including those in U.S. waters, might be largely the result of the
catastrophic decline in a single species of sea urchin (Lessios, 1988). The U.S.
Geological Survey should provide leadership in researching the histories of
species and ecosystems as interpreted from the fossil and geological record.
Taxonomists and ecologists should participate in the selection of species, and
priority should be given to team research.
Recommendation 2-5: Identify and thoroughly study the biology of selected species that have significant economic, scientific, or aesthetic value
or play a key role in a threatened biogeographic area or ecological habitat.
Because informed management decisions depend on detailed understanding
of the biological habits and requirements of species, it is important to identify
species relevant to environmental issues of high priority and initiate the process
of accumulating fundamental knowledge about them. For example, the population
biology of threatened and endangered species is obviously a subject of high
interest (Falk and Holsinger, 1991). Targeted research on selected species should
inform the NPBS about future needs, as well as urgent existing problems. Special
attention should be given to key species in the pilot project areas described under
Recommendation 2-13.
What Communities and Ecosystems Occur in the United
States? Where Do They Occur?
Recommendation 2-6: The NPBS should develop classifica-
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY74
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
tion systems for ecological units—such as communities, ecosystems, and
landscapes—that will provide consistent terminology for recognizing,
mapping and monitoring trends in the distribution and status of those units.
The NPBS should also move rapidly to define a set of core ecosystem
attributes and protocols for sampling, measuring, and recording those
attributes. NBS should play a major direct role in these efforts.
Classification systems for communities, ecosystems, and landscapes are
needed for recognizing and mapping them and for communicating information
about their status, distributions, and trends. There are currently no broadly
accepted classification schemes for such ecological units above the level of
species, and no single classification system is likely to serve all management
purposes. Community classifications for terrestrial, fresh-water, and marine
habitats have been established by The Nature Conservancy and have proved
useful for setting conservation priorities. However, classification schemes for
aquatic systems are generally poorly developed and rarely applied.
Ecological classifications are extremely important for the management of
biological resources on an ecosystem and regional basis, and they need to be
developed as fully as possible according to broadly based criteria. The same
criteria can be used to design specific classification systems for particular
purposes.
With the advent of better technologies for handling spatial data,
classification and mapping are no longer limited by such a priori constraints as
the need to limit a map to four colors. Instead, geographic phenomena can be
described with a set of attributes that can be selectively weighted and combined
for a posteriori classification and mapping. For example, specific terrestrial units
within a region can be described in a database according to their geology,
geomorphology, vegetation height, canopy leaf type, vertical stratification, and
canopy floristic composition. Regional vegetation or ecosystem patterns can then
be remapped in many ways on the basis of different classification rules.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY75
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
That approach obviates a single, general-purpose classification system and
can serve a wide range of users. Because the basis for classification is more
value-neutral than with traditional systems, resulting information will have a
stronger scientific basis. Thus, although we need standard ecosystem
classification schemes for monitoring and reporting purposes, the databases from
which the classifications are generated should record preclassified ecosystem
data. To that end, the National Partnership should give high priority to defining a
set of core attributes for characterizing vegetation, habitats, and ecosystems and
then establishing standard methods for measuring and recording those attributes
(see, for example, Bolton, 1991; DiCastri et al., 1992). Eventually, this approach
will lead to national and international databases that can be analyzed to uncover
patterns in ecosystem structure and composition and to evolve more functional
classification systems.
Useful classification systems will permit clear delineation of all included
ecological units. They should serve as a predictive base for anticipating
interactions among ecosystems and their physical environments. The ecological
units recognized should correspond to the distribution of constituent species
whose protection is likely to afford protection to the entire community. A
hierarchical structure of such classification systems is likely to prove useful, even
though effective conservation and management strategies would normally deal
with subordinate levels within the system (Bourgeon, 1988; Orians, 1993).
Why are Ecosystems Found Where They are?
Recommendation 2-7: The National Partnership, with the direct
involvement of NBS, should stimulate research to understand and develop a
predictive theory of keystone linkages and keystone species and should work
toward developing predictive models that facilitate sustainable
management of communities and ecosystems in the United States.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY76
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Valuable though ecological classification systems might be, they contain
little information about why ecosystems are found where they are. The members
and kinds of species living together in ecological assemblages are determined by
both local and regional processes, including current and historical interactions
between organisms and the physical environment. Individual species have
specific ranges of tolerance of physical environmental conditions, but the actual
range of environments occupied is reduced by interactions with other species.
Competition, predation, and parasitism happen only among organisms living in
the same area, but the kinds and numbers of individuals available to interact
depend on regional-scale processes. For example, a small isolated community is
likely to receive many immigrants that belong to species living in adjacent but
different communities, whereas most immigrants to portions of large, extensive
communities come from other parts of the same ones. Interactions with humans
occur at all spatial scales. The result of all these interactions is a recognizable,
but not identical, assemblage of species that occupies a particular zone of
environmental conditions.
The interactions that structure ecological assemblages range from strong to
weak. Ecologists refer to very strong interactions as keystone linkages and to
species that exert the strongest influences on the composition and functioning of
the assemblages of which they are a part as keystone species. Keystone linkages
and species are often identified empirically after the fact. Ecological theory
cannot yet predict where keystone features will be found, although experience
shows that some higher taxa, such as large echinoderms in the ocean, typically
play a keystone role. Developing a predictive capability is important because it
would enable direction of attention to elements and interactions whose
maintenance is critical to the continued and undiminished production of
important ecosystem services.
Recommendation 2-8: The NPBS should encourage research on
restoration of degraded environments.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY77
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of the United States have been degraded
by human activity. Although restoration has been attempted often, it has rarely
been successful (NRC, 1992). Understanding why communities and ecosystems
are found where they are and how they interact with adjacent assemblages is also
necessary as a foundation for methods of restoring degraded and damaged
ecosystems. To restore a community, we must know what the community was
like before it was degraded, how many and what kinds of organisms are likely to
arrive in the area without human assistance, and what conditions are necessary if
arriving individuals are likely to colonize successfully.
Research is needed on restoration methods that will work in the highly
varied terrestrial and aquatic environments of the United States. Successful
restoration also depends on historical analyses that permit an assessment of the
types of ecosystems that can persist in an area.
Efforts in restoration biology can take advantage of the large-scale
''experiments'' represented by major development projects that are required to file
environmental impact statements (EISs). The EIS amounts to a prediction of the
extent and kind of impact a project will ultimately have on the local environment.
Scientists can learn much from this process if EISs are done in such a way as to
establish a baseline and if appropriate follow-up monitoring is done to learn the
eventual ecological impact. Properly done, such "experimentation" can reveal
what kinds of projects have more or fewer environmental impacts than expected.
It might not be practical to treat all EISs this way, at least initially; but specific
case studies can be chosen to represent common classes of environmental
problems for which knowledge of the success or failure of specific management
decisions could inform future approaches.
Recommendation 2-9: The NPBS should identify target areas for
restoration. As a pilot project, NBS should lead the Partnership in an
assessment of the rivers of the United States
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY78
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
to identify those most appropriate for restoration according to biological indicators. The effort should be coordinated with current work of the Corps
of Engineers, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the U.S. Forest Service.
An important role for the NPBS would be to identify target areas for
restoration. As an example, consider the flowing waters of the United States,
which have been highly affected by human activity. We lack an inventory of the
rivers of the United States that would permit setting priorities for restoration of
rivers or river segments (NRC, 1992). There is a need for a national river
inventory that would place the nation's rivers in three categories: healthy,
degraded, or highly degraded. Rivers characterized as "degraded" should be
selected for aggressive restoration efforts. Mildly degraded rivers could be
improved with a modest investment. Within that class, restoration priorities can
be based on potentially valuable species, recreational value of the ecosystem, or
other criteria. A similar inventory could prove useful for targeting restoration
efforts in other types of ecosystems.
Recommendation 2-10: Current chemical assessments of pollution
sites (terrestrial, fresh-water, and marine) should be augmented by NPBS
research to develop biological assessment protocols.
The detection and characterization of polluted sites (fresh-water, marine, and
terrestrial) by EPA and other agencies now rely almost exclusively on chemical
assessments of habitats. Among the many species that have such habitats are
many that might serve as biological indicators of pollution. Research should be
done to identify such indicator species and learn enough about their biology to
make it possible to recognize warning signs of particular kinds of pollution.
Pollution assessment through such biological approaches is potentially more
cost-effective, quicker,
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY79
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and more useful than chemical methods. The indicators should also prove useful
for tracking the remediation of basic pollution problems.
Interactions among Ecosystems
The survival of species and the maintenance of essential ecological services
commonly depend on patterns of species migration and transport of materials
among ecosystems over an enormous range of spatial scales. Thus, local changes
in one ecosystem might have major consequences far beyond their immediate
range of obvious impact. Examples include the suspected reduction of North
American songbirds due to tropical and temperate habitat destruction and
fragmentation effects, including lower productivity and survival (Terborgh,
1989); decreases in salmon due to migration restrictions, nonpoint pollution, and
sedimentation; and decreases in aquatic species due to point and nonpoint
pollution, sedimentation, introduction of exotic species, changes in hydrology,
and loss of wetlands (Thorne-Miller and Catena, 1991). Most such examples
involve either outright habitat destruction that interrupts the movements,
breeding, or seasonal survival of widely ranging species; increases in the natural
flux of materials from terrestrial "source" to aquatic "sink" habitats; or
unexpected impacts on one habitat as a direct result of modifications made in
another. In any case, effects can be highly specific, as in the interruption of the
life cycle of symbionts that depend on particular hosts, or much more general, as
exemplified by the dramatic alteration of the entire Lake Erie ecosystem by the
accumulation of nutrients. Impacts can move from one terrestrial habitat to
another, from terrestrial to aquatic habitats, or from fresh-water to marine
habitats. The pesticide DDT, for example, applied to agroecosystems, became
concentrated as it moved up terrestrial and aquatic food chains (Carson, 1962).
Many harmful ecosystem interactions can be restricted to a
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY80
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
single watershed or forest, but most are broader in scope and transcend local or
even regional political boundaries. The National Partnership can play a critical
coordinating role in the identification of important shifts in ecosystem
interactions and the gathering of existing and new information on the magnitude
of habitat alteration or the material flux responsible. These activities should lead
to the identification of a small number of critical model systems for intensive
study. The systems should be included in the group of projects referred to in
Recommendation 2-13. Important candidate systems that are already the focus of
considerable local and federal attention include the effects of agriculture and land
development on fresh-water and marine ecosystems in South Florida (see
Box 2.3), and the loss of flyway habitat of migrating birds (see Box 4.1)
DETECTING TRENDS IN BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
The purpose of studying trends is to identify biological resources that are
changing in quality and quantity and to determine why they are changing. The
resources whose changes are of interest include species and their constituent
populations, evolutionarily related groups of species, ecological communities, and
ecosystems.
The importance of identifying trends in the condition of resources and
determining the causes of changes is highlighted by the increasing evidence of
rapid declines in important groups of organisms. For example, a rapid decline in
populations of at least half the species of mushrooms has been documented in
Europe (Arnolds, 1988, 1991; Gulden et al., 1992). Those fungi are fundamental
to healthy ecosystems because they form intimate associations with plant roots,
and the associations increase the rate at which the roots absorb nutrients from the
soil and make it possible for plants to survive in the particular ecosystems where
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY81
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 2.3: SOUTH FLORIDA AND THE EVERGLADES
The South Florida landscape is dominated by a series of closely linked
wetlands and aquatic ecosystems that extend from the Kissimmee River
and Lake Okeechobee in the North through the Everglades and Florida Bay
to the Florida Keys in the South. The Everglades is the largest wetland
ecosystem in the contiguous 48 states and has been the subject of intense
controversy about the ecological effects of drastically reduced and altered
patterns of water drainage and increased nutrient inputs from North to
South due to flood control, agriculture, and human settlement.
Attempts to assess status and trends of terrestrial and marine biota in
South Florida have been hampered by ignorance of the biology of many
species, especially invertebrates and lower plants, which have been ignored
except by a few systematists. For example, the endangered Florida Snail
Kite is almost exclusively dependent for its food on one species of fresh-
water mollusk, the apple snail. A real-estate developer would never plan a
human community without serious consideration of the location of
supermarkets. Yet, agencies have been forced to make major decisions
about habitat protection for the Snail Kite with very little knowledge about its
sole source of food (National Audubon Society, 1992).
Failure to monitor components of adjacent ecosystems (e.g., wading
birds in the Everglades, phytoplankton in Florida Bay, and reef corals in the
Keys) has delayed understanding of their close interdependence. This
failure has greatly increased the probable costs for environmental
restoration over what would have been required if the necessary scientific
assessments had been made sooner.
There is also no well-established regional infrastructure to bring
together status and trends data on organisms and conditions in disparate
environments. Moreover, much existing information is effectively
unavailable for lack of local resources and personnel to access and
interpret crucial remote sensing data, as for algal abundance and
productivity in Florida Bay.
The management authority for different biota, habitats, and water
resources is fragmented—scattered among federal, state, and county
agencies that work under different and sometimes conflicting missions and
mandates. For example, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the South
Florida Water Management District share responsibilities for
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY82
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
water-resource management. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the
National Park Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, the Florida Bay and Biscayne Bay State Parks, the Florida
Game and Freshwater Fish Commission, and the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection all have jurisdiction over various marine and
terrestrial protected areas and wildlife in the region. Counties and state
agencies share jurisdiction over land-use planning, zoning, development,
and resource use. Much ecologically important land is owned privately.
While some is managed for conservation, most is used for agriculture or
human settlement.
South Florida is by no means unique in this fragmentation of authority,
which interferes with the abilities of agencies and the private sector to
address a common set of environmental problems and needs. Closer
coordination is clearly needed.
Important local initiatives have begun. Secretary Babbitt recently
announced an agreement among major parties to reduce harmful nutrients
and improve water flow to the Everglades. This initiative and subsequent
actions would be greatly assisted by the proposed National Partnership for
Biological Survey. For example, cooperative studies involving the National
Biological Survey, the Corps of Engineers, the South Florida Water
Management District, and universities could use existing water-control
structures to determine how Everglades ecological communities respond to
different water-supply regimes. Such knowledge is essential for effective
restoration and sustainable use of this great wetland.
they occur. The causes of the decline are not fully known, but both air
pollution and acid rain are suspected contributors. Determining the causes is
made more difficult by the decrease in the number of taxonomists and ecologists
studying fungi and by lack of sufficient attention paid in the past to the
distributions of fungi.
The trends portion of a status and trends program should have the following
objectives:
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY83
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• To identify trends in a timely manner so that corrective actions can be
taken while multiple options are available. Typically, the later a
corrective action is taken, the fewer and more expensive are the ones
that remain. Generally, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
environmental restoration.
• To learn how local actions, both individually and collectively, influence
processes and products elsewhere. Spatial interconnectedness is
important. As projects study selected ecosystems in detail, potential
impacts of ecosystems and their components on one another should also
be monitored.
• To reduce uncertainty about risks so that expensive remedial actions are
not undertaken unnecessarily. Faced with great uncertainty about risks,
decision-makers are likely to take action to avoid any risk because they
cannot afford to remain passive when the possibility of great risk cannot
be ruled out. The more accurate the available information, the more
appropriate and cost-effective the steps taken will be.
• To evaluate the effectiveness of management decisions. One of the
requisites of adaptive management is that options that are chosen should
be evaluated by monitoring the changes in the managed resource, and
the management plan then revised accordingly.
• To direct attention to areas where problems are most likely to develop in
the near future. Among such areas are urban expansion zones, estuaries,
rivers, and zones of intensive resource management and extraction.
Data Useful for Determining Trends and Their Causes
Trends in the status of biological resources cannot be identified or
understood unless a solid database on the identification and distribution of the
resources is available. Collections and related literature are a primary source of
information on the past status of
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY84
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
species and ecosystems. The information they contain needs to be computerized
and made efficiently and rapidly available. Sampling procedures need to be set up
to ensure that records of selected taxa and ecosystems are kept up to date.
Historical information on several time scales is needed:
• Within recorded history. Data on the distributions and status of natural
resources within historical time are provided by specimens in museums
and herbaria, photographs, written records, archival aircraft and satellite
imagery, and oral histories. Such information is especially valuable
because it is potentially more complete than information from the more
distant past, because the causes of changes are likely to be human
actions similar to those operating today, and because it can help predict
what resource status is potentially achievable if the adverse effects of
human actions are sufficiently reduced in the future.
• Within postglacial times. Paleoclimatologists and paleoecologists are
able to reconstruct climates during the last glacial period and the period
during which the glaciers retreated to approximately their current
positions. They can also reconstruct shifts in the distributions of
organisms and ecological communities that accompanied climatic
changes. Those long-term records reveal that the ranges of species
shifted at varying rates and that species assemblages differed strikingly
from any found today. If climate change occurs, whether naturally or as a
result of human activity, information about ecological responses to past
change will be useful for managing ecological communities in the face
of future shifts.
• Over geological times spans. Although data on long-term, evolutionary
changes in the earth's biota are inevitably less complete than data from
the more recent past, they provide valuable insights into the evolution of
the groups of species found today, how they achieved their current
distributions, and what happened when organisms from different
geographic regions interacted with one another for the first time. For
example, when
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY85
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
North America and South America were joined by the formation of the
Panamanian land bridge about 3 million years ago, many species of
mammals crossed that bridge in both directions. At first, there was in
increase in the number of mammalian species in South America, but
over time many groups of South American mammals became extinct,
probably as a result of competition with and predation by North
American mammals (Marshall, 1985).
Given that human activities are resulting in massive exchanges of species
between continents, extinctions and ecological adjustments of biotas will
continue to increase in intensity in the future. For example, invasion of alien
species is the major cause of extinctions in the Hawaiian Islands today (see
Box 2.4) and has had substantial effects on many mainland ecosystems (Mooney
and Drake, 1986). Detecting invasions of exotic species and minimizing the
impacts of their colonization of the United States is an important use that
decision-makers will make of information from the National Partnership.
Data on Current Trends
Because the dominant organisms in many ecological systems, such as trees
and corals, are long-lived, many important changes in ecological communities
and ecosystems are too slow for us to sense directly (Jackson, 1992). Our abilities
to interpret slowly operating cause-effect relationships are even poorer.
Therefore, processes acting over decades are hidden and reside in what has been
called the invisible present (Magnuson, 1989). In the invisible present, change
can be occurring but undetected because of confounding factors. Only long-term
sustained monitoring and research can reveal these slow but important changes.
Recommendation 2-11: The National Partnership should identify and monitor the status and trends of organisms sensitive to climatic and pollution
factors, such as amphibians,
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY86
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
mollusks, songbirds, reef corals and other marine invertebrates, and fungi.
Changes in distributions and abundance of species are important indicators
of impending problems. They can direct attention to areas where improved
understanding of the causes of changes will be especially useful to decision-
makers. Species whose ranges and abundance are increasing provide signals as
valuable as those from species whose distributions and abundance are
decreasing. Studies at the margins of ranges of species are particularly important
for understanding the patterns of adaptation of those species to extreme
conditions and their likely response to change.
Recommendation 2-12: The NPBS should perform research to identify
the most useful biological indicators of ecological trends.
Because the goods and services that the nation receives from ecological
communities depend, in part, on their functional integrity, indicators of
functional-integrity are important to develop and monitor. Whereas ecologists can
identify general indicators, much work needs to be done to determine which
attributes are most usefully measured in particular ecological communities and
for particular management purposes (Karr, 1987). Some indicators will have
direct relevance to policy or management objectives (e.g., responsible use of an
economically valuable species whose viability depends on specific functional
properties of an ecosystem). Others will serve primarily as signals to direct
general attention to a region or type of ecological community. All indicators
should be judged against standards of repeatability and precision so that changes
and trends can be unambiguously detected.
Before a monitoring and assessment program is established, considerable
investment is needed to identify the most useful indicators. Procedures for doing
so include workshops, seminars,
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY87
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 2.4: HAWAII AND THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: AN URGENT
CONSERVATION PRIORITY
Strikingly different from the continental United States are the island
systems of the Pacific Ocean for which the United States has current or
historical responsibility. These comprise some 2,300 islands in eight
political jurisdictions extending over an area much larger than that of the 48
states. In these islands, there are more endemic organisms per unit of land
area than anywhere else in the United States and possibly more than
anywhere else on earth. Over three-quarters of the bird and plant
extinctions in the United States have occurred in Hawaii, where 34% of the
country's endangered plant species and 40% of the nation's endangered
bird species are found; another 30 bird species in Micronesia are proposed
for federal listing. Thus, the Pacific is a priority for preserving biodiversity,
with its rapidly changing political and economic situations—and time is
running out. These island habitats and their associated marine communities
can be dealt with effectively only through well-coordinated field research
focusing on species inventories, adequate ecological information, and
especially the role of alien-species invasion in island communities. In
dealing with Hawaii, the unincorporated U.S. territories, American Samoa
and Western Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
the Republic of Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, the organization of a separate office within
the NBS and of special attention within the NPBS seems indispensable.
In Hawaii, making up only 0.2% of the land area of the United States,
there are more than 10,000 unique species of plants, animals, fungi, and
microorganisms—more than 90% of all the native species there. Starting
with the arrival of the Polynesians 1,500 years ago and accelerating after
the arrival of Europeans nearly 300 years ago, humans have already
destroyed 90% of the dry forests, 61% of the mesic forests, 42% of the wet
forests, and 3% of the subalpine forests of these ecologically diverse
islands. Yet biodiversity is of critical importance to the future of Hawaii, in
relation to land development, tourism, the preservation of unique species
and for many other reasons. The integrated approach of the NPBS can
powerfully influence the course of development and the future of
biodiversity there.
Nonnative species are a special threat in Hawaii and throughout the
Pacific. Their populations should be monitored closely through a coop
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY88
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
and, where necessary, pilot projects. Retrospective analyses might help to
identify indicators that would have been especially useful in the recent past if they
had been used systematically. The NBS should be directly involved in this
research.
erative effort of the federal, state, local, and nongovernment agencies
involved. Controlling these alien species is of critical importance for the
preservation of native communities, to protect agriculture, and to retain
options for the future. For example, banana poka (Passiflora mollissima)
has already smothered over 70,000 acres of native forest on two islands
and threatens to spread rapidly over additional forested areas. The brown
tree snake (Boiga irregularis ) introduced on Guam has brought about the
extinction of nine of the 11 species of native land birds since 1975. Hawaii
is invaded successfully by at least 20 new nonnative invertebrates each
year, with as many as 39 recorded for a single year (Nature Conservancy
of Hawaii, 1992). Some of these species are destructive to native species,
others are injurious to agriculture, and still others cause problems for human
health.
Cooperation among a number of different entities—including several
departments of the state government; conservation groups led by The
Nature Conservancy; the University of Hawaii's Center for Conservation,
Research, and Training and other units; botanical gardens linked by the
Center for Plant Conservation; and the Bishop Museum—appears to offer a
promising direction for developing appropriate strategies for the
management of biodiversity in Hawaii in the context of regional
development. The recent adoption of a State Natural Area Partnership
program, which will provide 2:1 matching funds to private landowners for
long-term stewardship on their lands, is of special importance nationally and
would doubtless work well in other areas. The development of a State
Secretariat for Conservation, housed at and partly funded by the University
of Hawaii, is another promising effort to contribute to the integration of
conservation efforts in Hawaii. The kind of partnership among federal
agencies that is envisioned in the NPBS could complete the picture and
make the single area that represents one of our most critical conservation
priorities a model for the rest of the country.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY89
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
REGIONAL COLLABORATIVE PROJECTS
Recommendation 2-13: The NPBS should establish pilot projects in key
selected regions of the United States, in which terrestrial, fresh-water, and
marine communities and their interactions will be identified, characterized,
mapped, and monitored.
Our nation's biological resources are so great that management strategies
aimed at single species are often impractical or ineffective in preserving or
restoring them. Therefore, effective management requires that assessments of
status extend from individual species to the ecosystems in which they live and
that these assessments include an understanding of key mechanisms and the
processes that regulate them. A more detailed knowledge of what makes
ecosystems work as they do and how they are being affected by human activities
that fragment and degrade them will help us to deal with the increasingly complex
legal questions pertaining to land use and water management.
To develop this cross-scale and multidisciplinary information, the NBS
should work with other members of the National Partnership to choose a series of
pilot projects targeted at areas that are changing rapidly because of different types
of human activity (for example, metropolitan development, agricultural
expansion, and resource extraction); areas of high biodiversity; areas in which
diverse fresh-water, terrestrial, and marine ecosystems interact closely; and areas
that are ecologically unique. A series of workshops should be conducted to
determine which areas to select and how to design the projects.
The projects should be designed to produce detailed ecological
understanding of a range of ecosystems for comparison with other studies as
starting points for long-term monitoring and as the first pieces in a national
network that should ultimately include all major kinds of ecosystems. Equally
important, these projects can serve to develop and refine methods for conducting
future re
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY90
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
search more efficiently and effectively. Some of these sites would be ideal places
to conduct all-taxa biological inventories (Yoon, 1993).
These projects should not be limited to taxonomic and ecological research.
Evolutionary changes often accompany environmental ones and merit careful
analysis. For example, the evolution of resistance to chemical pesticide has often
occurred within a few generations or years (Georghiou, 1972). The genetic
structure of salmon populations can change rapidly and markedly in a few
generations in response to the rearing and releasing of hatchery fish (Gross,
1991). On a longer time scale, understanding the changes that have occurred in
North American environments through geological time provides a baseline for
comparison of the current status and trends. The projects should also involve
other disciplines as appropriate, such as geology, hydrology, atmospheric
science, and the social sciences.
If the sites of the studies are well chosen, the projects can be especially
useful in producing the kinds of scientific information that is needed to manage
ecosystems effectively. They can also provide important opportunities for cost-
effective collaboration among participants and for implementing an adaptive
approach to priority-setting and management. Such an approach could be
especially useful in areas like southern Florida, where many agencies and other
organizations have separate or overlapping jurisdictions in one watershed and can
operate under different or conflicting mandates (Box 2.3). In many cases, the
studies might be able to take advantage of existing research and management
programs (e.g., in reserves or long-term research areas) run under the auspices of
various participants.
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY91
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF BIOLOGICAL SURVEY92
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
3
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS
OF NPBS CLIENTS
One of the most important uses of the scientific information gathered by the
National Partnership for Biological Survey is to assist decision-makers in
addressing existing issues and in anticipating future ones related to biological
resources. Recommendations made in the previous chapter for setting priorities
for research and data-gathering emphasize factors relating to both near-term and
long-term resource management. The research activities outlined in Chapter 2 are
essential for gathering scientifically reliable information on which credible and
reliable decisions can be made with a high level of confidence. Decisions based
on inadequate, unreliable or incorrect information might be unwise and costly.
To respond effectively to information needs at all levels (local, regional,
national, and international), NPBS and National Biological Survey (NBS) data
and information policies and programs must move from problems to solutions. To
do so, the National Partnership must address the following questions:
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS93
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Who are the current and potential users of the kinds of information that
the NPBS will produce, and how can their needs be met? In particular,
how can research findings be communicated to decision-makers in ways
that foster understanding and promote appropriate interpretation and
use?
• How should NPBS information be collected and managed to serve
modeling and prediction efforts in support of biological-resource
management?
• How can the NPBS make the best use of the rapidly evolving technology
and systems in information management?
• How should information collection and management be coordinated
among NPBS participants?
Those questions should be addressed as soon as possible to produce a
detailed information model describing the flow of information from collection
and analysis to dissemination and use. The model should address general
conceptual issues, such as designing stronger linkages between scientific
information and decision-making, identifying key environmental variables and
relevant spatial and temporal scales, and assigning clear institutional
responsibilities to minimize redundancy. It should also deal with technical issues,
such as data format, data-exchange protocols, quality assurance and control, and
hardware and software requirements.
This chapter highlights some central issues for linking scientific information
to decision-making and offers recommendations on the quality, availability, and
dissemination of information.
INFORMATION NEEDS
The National Partnership will have to provide information on biological
resources in an easily interpretable form and in a timely manner to a wide array
of resource managers, city planners, conservationists, scientists, and others. Its
databases will have to
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS94
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
be able to answer standard questions about plants, animals, and microorganisms,
such as ''Where does this species occur?'' and questions that require more
complicated data analysis, such as "What species occur in a given vegetation
type, and which of them occur in other vegetation types as well?" Answers to
those kinds of questions should be available simply, quickly, and conveniently, to
anyone who needs them.
Mechanisms must be developed to provide reliable answers to complex user
queries that require new analysis and interpretation of existing data. Resource-
management decisions are themselves sources of information about biological
processes, and data accumulated from them should be incorporated in databases
and made available to be used in future decision-making.
Some specific needs for NPBS data are the following:
• Public agencies need better biological data to guide acquisition of land
and water rights for reserves; set priorities for research, management,
and restoration programs; zone local land use and regulate use of public
and private lands; locate and design public-works projects; and
coordinate resource management both domestically and across
international borders.
• The private sector needs better information on the distribution of legally
protected resources; on the impacts of metropolitan growth on
ecological resources, renewable land use and nonrenewable natural
resources and ways to reduce those impacts; on the distribution of
species of potential economic value; and on the biological impacts of
pollutants.
• Decision-makers need readily available information on status and trends
to alert them to issues that require legislative or regulatory attention and
to assess the effectiveness of current programs.
• Research scientists need improved access to biological data to help
direct and design their research.
• The public needs information on local organisms and habitats, on the
ecological role of humans in the environment, and on regional and
national trends.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS95
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Despite increasing management attention to ecosystem patterns and
processes, much planning and development is still based on single species. In the
absence of abundance or trend data for most species, inferences about status and
about conservation risk must be drawn from incomplete distribution data and
habitat models. Box 3.1 illustrates how spatial data can be integrated to model
distribution and management status, in this case for the orange-throated whiptail
lizard (Cnemidophorus hyperythrus). The example highlights several important
points:
• Species distributions are almost never known with certainty. Rather, they
are modeled by integrating information from such widely disparate
sources as biogeographic atlases, museum collections, habitat-
relationship information, and habitat maps derived from environmental
data and remote sensing imagery. Users of distribution information must
be clearly informed as to who produced it, how the results were
obtained, the information scale, potential biases, and inaccuracies. This
knowledge of information quality is needed to ensure appropriate use of
the information. Even for an easily observed and relatively well-known
species, existing collection and sighting data are likely to be dated or
biased. Computerization of existing data must be weighted in a way that
recognizes the differences in precision of different records.
• For conservation and management, knowing where a species occurs is
less useful than knowing what processes allow the species to persist in
some areas and not others. This requires observation, experimentation,
and modeling to develop good life-history information and an
understanding of ultimate controls on species' distributions and
abundances. For both practical and scientific reasons, we are unlikely to
have this knowledge in detail for most species in the near future. Until it
is available, we will have to depend largely on the best available survey
and monitoring data, correlative analyses, and scientific judgment.
• Hierarchical integration and spatial display of existing
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS96
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
distribution and habitat information is a powerful tool for revealing
information content and sampling biases in the data and for setting
priorities among taxa and areas for research and management.
Integration also helps to highlight possible spatial interactions among
neighboring regions and ecosystems.
Only a small fraction of existing biological data and information is now used
in planning and decision-making. These activities require information that differs
in kind and formats from what is typically generated by systematists and field
biologists, (see below), and the results of academic and agency research are
communicated poorly to decision-makers (NRC, 1993b). Managers complain
that relevant information is scarce, hard to find, and scattered among many
institutions. Furthermore, available information is often out of date and not
applicable to local problems. Regional planners are stymied by the uneven
geographic coverage of existing data and by the difficulty of integrating
information produced by different agencies at different times with different
methods of sampling, classification, and mapping.
There is wide agreement on the urgent need to organize existing biological
information and make it more readily available and to coordinate future data
collection and exchange (e.g., NRC, 1993a, b). This is a substantial task, and
neither its importance nor its difficulty should be underestimated. Data on a wide
array of topics, ranging from species distributions to socioeconomic activity, and
from many disciplines and sources must be integrated. Only a tiny fraction of
these data is now readily accessible for integration. Existing data are unevenly
documented and do not constitute a representative sample of all the nation's
biological resources.
Despite the size of the task, a national biological information system is
clearly attainable. Although they are far smaller than what is proposed in this
report, the experiences of ERIN in Australia (see Box 2.1), INBio (the National
Biodiversity Institute) in Costa Rica, and a number of U.S. state initiatives show
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS97
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 3.1: THE UTILITY AND LIMITATION OF SPECIES
DISTRIBUTION DATA
The accompanying diagram and figures show how disparate spatial
data can be integrated in a GIS to represent the distribution and
conservation status of a species. The process is illustrated for the orange-
throated whiptail (Cnemidophorus hyperythrus), a lizard native to coastal
Southern California and Baja California. The species is considered
threatened in California because it depends on coastal sage scrub, a
habitat that has been severely reduced and fragmented by urban
development. Together with the California Gnatcatcher and the Cactus
Wren, the whiptail now serves as a "target species" for ongoing
multispecies conservation planning efforts in the region (Hollander et al., in
press).
Distribution data for the whiptail are exceptionally good because it is
easy to observe, occurs in accessible areas, and has been sampled
intensively during the course of recent environmental impact studies.
Available information includes life-history notes, a coarse map of range
limits, and a table of habitat preferences, which are provided by the
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships (WHR) System (Zeiner et al. 1990);
remotely sensed Thematic Mapper imagery of Orange, Riverside, and San
Diego Counties (Panel A); digital maps of land ownership (Panel B);
museum collection data and sightings spanning the past century (Panel C);
and maps of suitable habitats as defined by vegetation in the WHR System
and mapped at two different scales with 1990 Thematic Mapper satellite
imagery (map boundaries from the California Gap Analysis) and 1991
aerial photography (regions with small crosshatching in Panel D were
mapped as part of San Diego Counties Multispecies Conservation Plan-
MSCP). The processing steps necessary to produce Panel D—which is a
composite of field sighting data, habitat maps within the range limits of the
species, and the location of existing nature reserves—are shown in the
accompanying flow chart.
This example illustrates both the utility and limitations of existing
information for mapping species distributions and assessing their conser
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS98
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
vation status. Specifically, existing museum collection data vary in date
and locational precision. In this case, 349 museum specimens could be
mapped with certainty only to the nearest USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle,
providing a crude representation of the range of the species.
Sighting data are both very dynamic and potentially very biased. Most
observations of the lizard were collected after 1985 for projects requiring
environmental impact reports. These sightings are clustered at the margins
of urban and agricultural areas in San Diego County, where most
development is occurring.
Habitat mapping and GIS modeling provide a means of extrapolating
the potential distribution of the species. In this instance, we have highlighted
areas within the range limits of the species that support vegetation classified
as suitable habitat by a statewide habitat relationships system. The
potential distribution is somewhat different, depending on whether 1:24,000
or 1:100,000 scale vegetation maps are used. Even the very general pattern
predicted by WHR and vegetation data is suspect, because the small
amount of life-history information available for the species suggests that it is
limited more by its major food item, a termite, than by vegetation.
Compiling the information in Panels A-D took considerable time, effort,
and technology, yet it provides only a sketch of the species distribution, to
say nothing of abundance or trends. Most other species will be even more
challenging than the whiptail, which is readily observable and has received a
great deal of attention. However, with GIS relational modeling and display,
the distribution of a species can be inferred by extrapolating along several
lines of evidence. Different data sets can be compared and contrasted,
helping to reveal biases and uncertainties. Further study of the species can
be productively focused on poorly surveyed areas, and existing habitat
models can be refined on the basis of patterns of agreement and
disagreement between predicted and observed distributions.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS99
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS100
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS101
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Processing Flow in Species Distribution Mapping
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS102
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
that biological data collection, exchange, and integration are both practical
and cost-effective. Nevertheless, an effective National Partnership will require
substantial cultural and institutional changes to build stronger bridges among the
broad spectrum of producers and users of biological data.
Recommendation 3-1: Under the leadership of the NBS, the National
Partnership should develop a National Biotic Resource Information System.
This should be a distributed federation of databases designed to make
existing information more accessible and to establish mechanisms for
efficient, coordinated collection and dissemination of new data and
information. The NBS should take the lead in promoting standards for
sampling, measurement, data recording, and data transfer. It should
support continuing state efforts to develop regional and statewide environmental databases and should work closely with and support database
development in museums, universities, and other appropriate organizations.
It should also participate in interagency initiatives to coordinate collection
and management of biodiversity data by the federal government.
The Need for Spatial Data
Until recently, most research biologists have received little training in
cartography or spatial analysis. They might have consulted maps or even prepared
them as part of their investigations, but most biologists view mapping as
peripheral to their research. Most ecological field research has been conducted on
small geographic scales, and collections and field plots have rarely been precisely
located spatially (i.e., "georeferenced"). In contrast, maps are a mainstay of
planners and decision makers, who must locate and quantify resources and site
projects over large planning areas.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS103
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
That difference in perspectives has contributed to the separation of research
and management and has reduced the usefulness of much existing biological
information for management purposes. However, the separation is rapidly
disappearing as ecologists and conservation biologists pay increased attention to
spatial heterogeneity at landscape and regional levels and to the role of spatial
pattern in ecosystem functioning, species persistence, and the maintenance of
biological diversity.
New technologies have revolutionized mapping over the last 20 years. They
include aircraft-and satellite-borne remote sensors, global positioning systems for
satellite-based location and navigation, and spatial-data handling tools, such as
geographic information systems (GISs), visualization, and spatial-decision
support systems. Maps, once primarily a vehicle for communicating research
results, are now themselves used as data to derive new information. Furthermore,
many spatial data are now acquired and stored in what has been referred to as
"value-neutral" form (e.g., as actual measurements, rather than categories or
assessments). While creating new opportunities for spatial analysis, these
advances place a new burden on producers of spatial data for fuller
documentation of data sources, data content, accuracy, scale, appropriate use, and
other characteristics. This documentation is called "metadata"—e.g., data about
data.
Those scientific and technological advances have led to rapid growth and
evolution of a National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) that is leading to a far
more accurate and detailed representation of earth features and phenomena
(NRC, 1993a). Biologists lag well behind physical scientists in establishing
coordinated efforts to develop standard spatial-data sets. For example, detailed
maps of vegetation do not exist for the United States, nor for many of its regions.
We lack even reliable range maps for most organisms, including many
vertebrates and plants. The NPBS will need to remedy these deficiencies to take
full advantage of current and future capabilities in spatial mapping.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS104
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Recommendation 3-2: Under the leadership of the NBS, the National
Partnership should recognize and participate actively in the evolving National Spatial Data Infrastructure. It should promote greater awareness and use of existing spatial data and technologies; increase efforts to locate
field data spatially; adopt, where appropriate, existing standards for
mapping and spatial-data handling; and increase the involvement of
biologists in federal efforts to develop spatial-data and metadata standards.
Specific Needs Include
• Increased training of biologists in modern spatial analytical theory and
spatial statistics (Levin, 1993).
• Fuller use of existing spatial data and technologies, such as global
positioning systems, remote sensing, and GISs for biological survey and
monitoring, specifically to achieve fuller coordination of ground
sampling and mapping activities through carefully designed, multistage
mapping and monitoring schemes. This will require a new level of
interaction between traditional field biologists and systematists,
landscape ecologists, and earth-system scientists and increased federal
and state support for application of remote sensing to biological survey
and monitoring, especially by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) and the Department of the Interior.
• Increased standardization of collection and documentation of spatial
biological data, including development of a detailed model for
biodiversity data (i.e., defining biodiversity variables and their possible
transformations, functional relationships, computer representations, and
documentation) and then establishment, adoption, and implementation
of data and metadata standards for describing, classifying, and mapping
biological features, as described by the Interior Geographic Data
Committee (1992).
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS105
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT OF DATA AND
INFORMATION
A Federated Database Approach
Biological information is produced and maintained by diverse federal, state,
and local agencies and private organizations. Collectively, this is a vast effort, and
no organization or centralized facility could effectively compile, maintain, and
distribute all relevant information. A more realistic goal is to link existing and
new biological databases into a distributed federation of NPBS databases. Such a
linkage must occur both physically over networks and logically through the use
of appropriate software and data standards.
Many pieces of a distributed biological database are already in place or
under development, notably taxonomic databases (such as the Flora of North
America), conservation databases (such as the Natural Heritage and Gap Analysis
databases), monitoring data (such as the National Science Foundation's [NSF]
Long Term Ecological Research [LTER] sites and the Breeding Bird Survey), and
the databases maintained by statewide natural history surveys (such as those in
Illinois and Kansas).
Consistency and documentation of data content, quality, performance, and
exchange are essential for ensuring the usability of scientific data. Data that are to
be useful decades after they are collected have special documentation
requirements (Bowser, 1986). The integration of existing biological databases is
seriously impeded by the lack of data standards. To be effective, the development
of new standards must build from heterogeneous sources and be phased to allow
existing data to be transferred to a more uniform database environment.
Recommendation 3-3: The NPBS should develop and adopt
appropriate standards for data quality assurance and quality
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS106
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
control and metadata content. The standards should be established by
federal agencies in close collaboration with states and the private sector and
should build on current efforts, such as those of the Federal Geographic Data
Committee, the Interior Geographic Data Committee, the Interagency Task
Force on Water Quality Monitoring, the Freshwater Imperative, the
Interagency Working Group on Data Management for Global Change, and
Systematics Agenda 2000.
Environmental and socioeconomic databases are evolving rapidly through
numerous state efforts, as well as such federal initiatives as the U.S. Global
Change Data and Information System (GCDIS); the NSF LTER network; the
NASA Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS); the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Environmental Monitoring and
Assessment Program (EMAP); EPA's revised water-quality information system,
STORET; the Census Bureau's Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding
and Referencing system; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's
climatological, meteorological, and oceanographic databases; the U.S.
Geological Survey National Mapping Division and National Water Quality
Information System; and the Department of Energy's Carbon Dioxide Information
Analysis Center database. Those are some of the major building blocks of the
National Spatial Data Infrastructure referred to above. They have developed
independently of most biological databases, notably the museum collections and
state biological surveys.
Recommendation 3-4: The NPBS should develop its databases in
conjunction with the major federal environmental and socioeconomic
databases to minimize redundancy, to avoid conflicting terminology and
classification systems, and to maintain consistent data standards and
formats.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS107
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Limits to Federation
Much of the information generated and managed by the NPBS will be
housed in and exchanged over computer networks. Many producers and
consumers of NPBS data do not yet have network access, but most will have it
soon. Already, 5-10 million people in 50 countries are linked via Internet.
Free sharing of data raises issues of proprietorship and appropriate use.
Some individuals and institutions distribute primary data only after they have had
time to conduct their own analyses and publish the results. Even more important,
integrating data can require a commitment of time and resources far beyond what
most institutions can afford.
Recommendation 3-5: Full and open sharing of biological data on a
timely basis should be an objective of NPBS data management, and adequate
funds should be made available to meet this objective. The objective should
apply foremost to data acquired with public funds. Conventions and
protocols for sharing of primary data should be developed cooperatively
among NPBS participants. Under NBS leadership, the NPBS should move
quickly to produce a data and information policy for establishment,
maintenance, and distribution of long-term national and international
biological data and derived information.
Learning from Others
The human-genome project has been described as the first truly ''big-
science'' project in biology. It has as its primary product, huge databases of
complex genetic information. The National Center for Atmospheric Research
stores and manipulates large volumes of data that can readily be visually browsed
and retrieved across Internet. The four national supercomputers supported by
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS108
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
NSF manage large amounts of astronomical data. When fully functional, NASA's
EOSDIS will process at least 30,000 digital images per day while managing or
linking to a wide range of biological and geophysical databases.
Recommendation 3-6: NPBS data managers should consult with the
Human Genome Project, EOSDIS information scientists, the National
Center for Atmospheric Research, the NSF supercomputer centers, and
other large database programs to take advantage of the lessons and
products from these efforts to manage large volumes of biological and
geophysical data and to expedite the development of an effective,
distributed database environment.
Custodianship
Data quality assurance and control are best achieved through the clear
assignment of custodianship for subsets of the data to appropriate experts or
organizations. Curators must be appointed with the responsibility for overseeing
the long-term quality, currency, and consistency of the data. That will help to
transform databases from passive collections of information into something more
similar to the scientific literature, which relies upon an active set of editors and
reviewers to ensure its quality. To support the custodians, tools must be
developed to encourage those who contribute to databases but do not have
curatorial obligations to take responsibility for the quality of their submissions.
Examples of custodial tools include standardized submission formats and
intelligent software for screening submitted data.
Recommendation 3-7: NPBS data managers should develop
mechanisms to ensure the clear assignment of custodial relationships for
data sets and to develop appropriate support tools for the custodians.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS109
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
Data Archiving
The utility of data on status and trends will increase with the length of the
record. A National Biotic Resources Information System will be most useful if it
can archive biological data for many years or even centuries. A highly distributed
system with many different custodians, as proposed here, is potentially vulnerable
to loss of a dataset if the custodianship falters. Mechanisms should be developed
to ensure that the data archives of NPBS custodians are preserved beyond the life
span of individuals and institutions. For example, regional and national sites
might have to be designated as repositories for data for which custodians cease to
exist.
Recommendation 3-8: NPBS data managers should identify a small
network of organizations to form the core of a national biological archive for
data that merit preservation but have no active custodian. The NPBS should
also develop clear guidelines for documentation, storage, and retrieval of
these data.
Functional Requirements for NPBS Data Management
To be effective and useful, distributed databases must meet a number of
functional requirements, among which the key ones are the following:
• Network interfaces. Distributed databases work best when the data are
available through standard interfaces over networks, such as Internet.
Effective interfaces between databases can be developed only if all the
databases have a standard means of allowing other computer programs to
interact with them. Public-domain programs that are now appearing—
such as GOPHER, MOSAIC, WAIS, and WWW—make it possible to
provide integrated access into multiple databases easily and
inexpensively.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS110
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
• Distributed queries. A user of NPBS information should be able to query
multiple databases. Success depends on the degree of consistency among
databases regarding taxonomic conventions, use of terms, geographic
addressing schemes, data-management systems, and analytical software.
Users should not be required to know all synonyms and geographic
transformations, nor should they be expected to maintain many
functionally equivalent software packages. Meeting the goal of a fully
distributed database will require adoption of standard names and terms
(or system-supported synonyms) and vendor-independent data
representations.
• Queries on different scales and levels of organization. Users of NPBS
information systems will want to query the systems at different
conceptual levels. For example, how many cricetine rodent species live
in Ingham County? In Michigan? In the United States? What are the
status and trends of fish populations of the Upper Peninsula of
Michigan? Which of these populations are endangered? Supporting
those different queries will require that the survey information system
support hierarchical classifications so that questions can be posed and
answered easily at different taxonomic or geographical levels. Because
the classifications will change over time, they must be implemented in a
manner that allows easy modification.
• Vertical and horizontal integration of spatial data. Relevant information
on biological resources must flow to local and county decision-makers
and resource managers. Information must also support larger-scale
analyses to place local actions in perspective and to address regional and
national management issues and those which span administrative
boundaries. Meeting these needs will sometimes require vertical
integration—combining information about a place from many scales
(e.g., species collection points, 1:24,000 vegetation maps, and 1:100,000
soil maps); information must be brought to a common scale of
representation for analysis. Alternatively, information might be available
on one scale but from different sources for different parts of the area
being examined; this information requires horizontal integration—
information pieced together with a common classification system and
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS111
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
definitions. In other words, information must be managed to support
vertical integration (across space and time scales) and horizontal
integration (across space and time on a fixed scale).
• Flexible system design. Modern hardware and software systems have
useful lives of at most a few years. Therefore, NPBS databases must be
designed in a way that will facilitate their transfer across multiple future
computer platforms. That is best achieved by using, where possible,
commercially available products that adhere to extant standards. Custom
software can be difficult, sometimes impossible, to transport to new
systems. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has
substantial expertise in this regard and should be consulted in the
planning of the NPBS data system.
Recommendation 3-9: NPBS data managers should meet the key
functional requirements for an effective distributed database. Among them
are standard interfaces, an ability to query multiple databases easily and
across taxonomic and geographic scales, and easy transport of the data to
new computer platforms as they are developed.
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN NBS
Consolidation and Coordination of DOI Survey and
Monitoring Data
DOI has proposed initiating a National Biological Status and Trends
(NBST) program at the NBS. It will be a coordinated monitoring program based
on existing activities in DOI, including the National Wetlands Inventory, the
Waterfowl Inventory, the Park Service Inventory and Monitoring Program, the
Gap Analysis Program, the Breeding Bird Survey, the Global Change Research
Program, Biomonitoring of Environmental Status and Trends, and the Great
Lakes Fisheries Assessment. DOI proposes
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS112
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
to initiate the program by consolidating databases, designing a statistically valid
monitoring network capable of biennially assessing biological status and trends,
developing standardized data collection and management protocols, and
establishing rigorous quality-assurance and quality-control procedures.
The committee believes that such an effort is central to the NBS and strongly
endorses the concept, but the program's scope should evolve as the NBS and
other DOI survey and monitoring activities are extended to other taxonomic
groups, ecosystem types, and geographic areas, as discussed in Chapter 2. The
NBST program should include the management, archiving, and analysis of DOI
survey and monitoring data of national extent or significance. At the same time,
the NBST program must be coordinated with other important monitoring
programs outside DOI. Continuing efforts like the joint Fish and Wildlife
Service-Smithsonian initiative, Standard Methods for Measuring Biological
Diversity, should be accompanied by similar initiatives concerned with
management, exchange, and integration of biological survey and monitoring
data, such as The Nature Conservancy's Heritage Program, and broadly based
projects, such as the Flora of North America. The integrated management
schemes being developed for southern Florida (see Box 2.3) and California (see
Box 3.2) constitute excellent regional examples of the need for infrastructure
sufficient to bring together status and trends data of organisms and conditions in
disparate environments.
Recommendation 3-10: The NBS should establish a National
Biological Status and Trends (NBST) program that builds from existing DOI
survey and monitoring programs eventually to include a broader range of taxonomic groups, ecosystem types, and geographic areas. At the outset,
staff should be appointed and mechanisms developed to ensure that the
NBST program is effectively linked to related federal survey and monitoring
initiatives and to other pertinent databases.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS113
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
BOX 3.2: NEW APPROACHES TO INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION PLANNING IN
CALIFORNIA
California's biodiversity is extraordinary for its richness (e.g., 5,862
flowering plant species, or one-fourth of all flowering plant species in the
conterminous United States) and a high level of endemism (e.g., 24% of all
flowering plant species). Unfortunately, this biodiversity has been seriously
threatened by human activities, and the state leads the nation in federally
listed threatened and endangered species.
As with other states, there is no single repository for data on
California's biodiversity. The data are scattered across many institutions,
and general standards have not been established for data collection,
classification, or transfer or for database design. The state of California is
now moving rapidly toward coordinated collection and management of
biodiversity data. In 1991, a Biodiversity Memorandum of Understanding
was signed by major federal and state agencies, with the intent of promoting
interagency cooperation in conserving biodiversity across administrative
boundaries. A California Council on Biological Diversity, established to
promote this new approach, was charged to
• Develop cooperative biological inventory projects.
• Identify and agree to more consistent management of riparian and other
sensitive areas.
• Share management expertise.
• Share funding to accomplish conservation projects.
• Develop mitigation and trading banks to allow flexibility for development
and conservation projects.
• Work with researchers to ensure necessary advancement in knowledge
and technology.
To meet those goals, the council has divided the state into 10
"bioregions" that are defined mainly by physiographic and biogeographic
features. A new process, Natural Community Conservation Planning
(NCCP), has as its objective active conservation of native plants and
animals and their habitats through an expanded system of natural reserves.
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS114
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
An NCCP pilot project in the threatened coastal sage-scrub natural
community of southern California has recently been completed; it
exemplifies the kind of effort required to implement proactive conservation
strategies in areas under intense population and economic pressure.
Applying GIS modeling to available socioeconomic and ecological data, a
scientific review panel defined core and satellite habitat areas on the basis
of the extent and quality of coastal sage-scrub vegetation and identified
three target species—the California Gnatcatcher, the Cactus Wren, and the
orange-throated whiptail lizard (Box 3.1)—to help efforts to plan and design
reserves. The panel also attempted to define the extent and location of
allowable development of remaining habitats. Finally, a research agenda
was proposed to help resolve unanswered questions bearing on
conservation of the community and its component biodiversity. It addressed
six basic subjects: biogeographic inventory and mapping, monitoring of
trends in selected taxa, dispersal characteristics and corridor-use patterns
of target and other animal species, demography and population viability
analysis, survey and autecology of sensitive plants and animals, and
genetic studies.
The NCCP project in southern California underscores several user
needs that the NBS must meet if it is to be effective: the need for better
organization of and access to highly dispersed biological data; the need for
information at all levels of biological organization, ranging from genes to
communities; the need for distribution and monitoring data on species and
habitats at both local and regional scales; the need to account for
socioeconomic pressures and trends; and the critical need for information
on spatial characteristics such, as species' dispersal traits and effects of
habitat patch size and arrangement on population viability.
NBS COORDINATION OF A NATIONAL DISTRIBUTED
DATABASE
Most biodiversity data are produced locally and are dynamic. Therefore, the
NBS should not attempt to develop a large, central
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS115
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
ized database facility to store and distribute biodiversity data. Instead, both the
National Partnership and the NBS specifically should evolve a highly distributed
network of databases connected through the Internet and by other appropriate
means. Because most biodiversity data are maintained within states or by local
jurisdictions and institutions, the NPBS will always be a highly decentralized,
largely bottom-up effort. It is critical that this effort be well coordinated to
minimize redundancy and to allow integration of data, but there will probably
never be a single database of databases that will direct users to all relevant
sources. The ERIN approach (as described in Chapter 2) was logical for
Australia, where relatively few electronic databases existed earlier, but the United
States already has a large number of such databases. Instead, data-sharing must
be fostered through creative use of network tools. The NBS can contribute to this
effort by taking the following steps:
Recommendation 3-11: The NPBS and the NBS should develop a
highly distributed federation of databases, rather than a larger centralized database facility. To facilitate the sharing of data among the databases, the
NBS should:
• Establish a moderate-sized facility with personnel and computing
capabilities for archiving and distributing regional and national
NBS data sets and for meeting the proposed goals of a National
Biological Status and Trends program.
• Use existing tools and develop new ones to help NPBS users locate
data and information, both digital and nondigital. For example,
the NBS should explore the establishment of region-specific and
program-specific NBS database directories and a national directory
of these directories that are accessible through powerful national
information networks, such as Internet.
• Promote the adoption of data standards by NPBS partners by
cooperating with existing efforts (e.g., ABC, 1993), by
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS116
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
convening technical workshops and committees, and by providing
leadership in developing and applying new standards for biological
data.
INFORMATION DISSEMINATION
The National Partnership will supply data and information ranging from raw
measurements to complex analysis and interpretation, and the results will be
published in maps, graphical products, and reports. The Partnership (including the
NBS) should use existing media and channels of information exchange whenever
possible, including scientific journals, other publications, extension services
(e.g., those of the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture), and information networks. Carefully reviewed technical reports
containing original data or their interpretation should also be prepared as needed.
Primary printed products must include map and graphical representations of
spatial or time-series data for biogeographic areas, ecosystems, habitats, and
species.
To ensure appropriate use, data must be subject to strong quality assurance
and control. Published data sets should receive professional review before they
are distributed. General guidelines for documentation and review of biological
data are few, and development of such guidelines should be given high priority.
For reasons of efficiency and utility, dissemination of NPBS information should
be structured in the context of user interest in particular regions, habitats, or taxa.
That means that users will have to define their queries precisely and consistently,
including the level of detail and scale. In answering those queries, NPBS
information should be presented to highlight what is and is not known by means
of diverse, user-friendly formats that are readily accessible to users of varied
background and expertise. That will help to ensure correct interpretation and
appropriate use. For example, the implications of the reported presence or
absence of a
MEETING THE INFORMATION NEEDS OF NPBS CLIENTS117
About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the original
typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be retained,
and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
A Biological Survey for the Nation
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2243.html
given species depend greatly on the nature of the studies on which the report is
based.
Software tools must be responsive to and readily accessible to all users, from
both the public and the private sectors. Needs range from primary data to various
kinds of derived products.
Recommendation 3-12: To facilitate use of the data that it generates, the
National Partnership should develop software tools for data visualization and
analysis, for data reformatting and conversion, for trend analysis of
monitoring data, for spatial interpolation of sighting and collection data, and
for GIS habitat modeling.
Assessments and Communication of Results to Decision-
Makers
One of the challenges that the National Partnership must address is the
effective communication of research results to resource managers, planners, and
legislators. Much more is required than data summaries, technical reports, and
professional articles. Those users have questions whose answers are not obvious
in existing research products. Rather, policy and management actions often
require reinterpretation of existing information. It is here that data and
information are most vulnerable to inappropriate use and interpretation and that
