STORY PREFACE 
Story Summary 
At 4:00 a.m. Sunday morning, 25 June 1950, North Korea crossed the 38th Parallel (known as the "Line of Demarcation" in that part of the world), and launched a full-scale invasion of South Korea. The UN Security Council immediately passed a resolution calling on the "Democratic People’s Republic of Korea" (the DPRK) to cease hostilities and to withdraw.

When the North Koreans refused, the Security Council passed a second resolution on the 27th of June, recommending that UN members "furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea [South Korea] as may be necessary to repel the armed attack and restore the international peace and security in the area."

Meanwhile, DPRK’s southern-moving forces were advancing rapidly. Seoul, South Korea’s capital, fell in four days.

These events posed a major challenge to the Truman Administration and to America’s allies. If the invasion were not checked, it would set a precedent that could easily undermine the confidence of post-WWII countries relying on the U.S. for protection. Countries like South Korea.

How was it that a nation, politically unified for two millennia, was now fighting itself?
KOREA DIVIDED 
Japan had annexed Korea in 1910 and ruled it until the end of WWII. When Japan lost the war, Korea (like Germany) would be divided into two areas.

At the July-August 1945 Potsdam Conference (where Truman, Stalin, Churchill and Atlee discussed how various territories would be split up and operate at the end of the war in the Pacific), the three powers agreed Korea would be divided roughly in half - at the 38th Parallel. The Soviet Union, and its allies, would operate in the North while the US, and its allies, would operate in the South.

In August, 1947, China, Great Britain and the US recommended a plan to reunify the country, but the Soviet Union (still under Stalin's control) refused to cooperate. National elections, supervised by the United Nations, took place in May of 1948, but the North Koreans neither took part in, nor recognized the results of, the election.

The South Koreans chose representatives for the National Assembly of the new Republic of Korea. By July of 1948, the country had a new constitution and the United States Army Forces in Korea ceased to have any governmental authority in the country.

North Korea, meanwhile, formed its own government in a country called the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Kim Il Sung was its leader and his government claimed jurisdiction over the entire Korean Peninsula (including the South).
RESULTS OF THE SPLIT

In November of 1948, South Korea created a national department of defense. By June of 1950, the new republic in the south had a very small operational defense force:

    Army: 94,808 soldiers


    Coast Guard: 6,145 sailors


    Air Force: 1,865 members


    National Police: 48,273 constables

The United States Army, at the same time, had a total active-duty strength of about 591,000 men in ten combat divisions. Around 360,000 of those troops were home (WWII had ended only five years before) with the remaining 231,000 serving in various overseas commands. (A total of about 108,500 were serving in the Far East.)

According to the US Army history of the Korean Conflict:

    By late 1949 talk of a North Korean invasion was almost routine in intelligence circles, but it went unnoticed against the background of threatening Communist activities in other parts of the world- Southeast Asia, western Europe, and the Middle East. In the early summer of 1950 senior American observers discounted the likelihood of a North Korean invasion. Both Maj. Gen. Charles A. Willoughby, the FEC G-2 (intelligence officer), and the American embassy in Seoul opined that an attack was unlikely and that the North Koreans would continue to employ guerrillas and psychological warfare. The officers of the KMAG felt that an attack by North Korea was not imminent and, if it happened, they thought that the South Koreans could repel it. Since the United States had no plan to counter an invasion, any debate about an American intelligence failure regarding the North Korean attack was academic.

In June of 1950, talk of an invasion became reality.
WHY WAR?

Korea, a small country numbering 30 million people in 1950, lies at the point where three great Asian powers (Japan, China, and the former Soviet Union) meet.

At the end of WWII, preoccupied with Soviet intentions in western Europe, the United States attached little strategic importance to Korea. America did assist the South Koreans in national elections and helped them form the Republic of Korea (ROK). The Soviet Union, on the other hand, took an active role in governing North Korea and in forming the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK).

The United States Army withdrew its combat forces from South Korea in 1949 but left a military advisory group to assist the South Korean Army. In early 1950, the Soviets supplied weapons to (and assigned several thousand Russian soldiers as trainers for) the North Korean People's Army. Armed clashes between North and South Korea were common along the 38th Parallel, but in June 1950 American observers did not anticipate an invasion of the South.

Determined to reunite Korea by force, the North invaded the South on June 25, 1950. South Korean troops, fighting in July and August with relatively few reinforcements, were soon exhausted. Civilians, ordered to evacuate their villages by the South Korean Army, became refugees as they moved south in the P'ohang sector on August 12, 1950.
AMERICA INTERVENES

The Truman Administration was immediately informed of the invasion. Hesitant to get involved unless South Korea could not defend itself, the President decided to assist when the Republic of South Korea asked for America's help. By the 26th of June, General MacArthur received new orders from the commander in chief and on June 30 was authorized to send in combat troops.

Truman advised the American public of his intention to intervene on June 27. (Later, he said it was the toughest decision he ever made in his life; for years he kept a letter from a bereaved father in his desk drawer.)

Although welcomed by South Korea, that military assistance was, at first, not as far-reaching as the Republic of Korea had hoped it would be. Nor was it without lingering controversy (for events such as those at No Gun Ri).

For starters, the US had no airbases in Korea. Air raids, at the beginning of the conflict, were often carrier-based. And when Americans were first placed in harm's way, there was only one evacuation hospital and one Mobile Army Surgical Hospital (M*A*S*H) unit to support all American forces in Korea.

By September, however, the combined efforts of the U.S. and South Korean Armies, aided greatly by air and naval superiority, held the North Koreans in check at the Pusan Perimeter. On the 29th of September, 1950, Seoul was officially reestablished as the Republic of Korea's capital city. By October, the North had sustained heavy equipment losses.

The conflict, however, was far from over.
CHINA INTERVENES

Military troops assisting South Korea, fighting as part of the UN's response to North Korea's invasion, had crossed the 38th Parallel into North Korean territory. American combat forces were among them.

In late October of 1950, unseen by UN personnel, thousands of Communist Chinese Forces (referred to as "CCF") crossed (this is a Chinese-perspective link) the China-Korea border and slipped into North Korea from Manchuria. By early November, those Chinese soldiers had nearly crushed the ROK troops and attacked the surprised Americans:

    They came out of the hills near Unsan, [126 longitude, 40 latitude] North Korea, blowing bugles in the dying light of day on 1 November 1950, throwing grenades and firing their "burp" guns at the surprised American soldiers of the 8th Cavalry Regiment, 1st Cavalry Division. Those who survived the initial assaults reported how shaken the spectacle of massed Chinese infantry had left them. Thousands of Chinese had attacked from the north, northwest, and west against scattered U.S. and South Korean (Republic of Korea or ROK) units moving deep into North Korea. The Chinese seemed to come out of nowhere as they swarmed around the flanks and over the defensive positions of the surprised United Nations (UN) troops.

Were South Korean and American troops, nearly overrun by the enemy, able to withstand this surprise attack?

    Within hours the ROK 15th Regiment on the 8th Cavalry's right flank collapsed, while the 1st and 2d Battalions of the 8th Cavalry fell back in disarray into the city of Unsan. By morning, with their positions being overrun and their guns falling silent, the men of the 8th Cavalry tried to withdraw, but a Chinese roadblock to their rear forced them to abandon their artillery, and the men took to the hills in small groups. Only a few scattered survivors made it back to tell their story.

The next morning, in the midst of mass confusion, one of many mistakes cost even more lives as the Chinese attacked again:

    The remaining battalion of the 8th Cavalry, the 3d, was hit early in the morning of 2 November with the same "human wave" assaults of bugle-blowing Chinese. In the confusion, one company-size Chinese element was mistaken for South Koreans and allowed to pass a critical bridge near the battalion command post (CP). Once over the bridge, the enemy commander blew his bugle, and the Chinese, throwing satchel charges and grenades, overran the CP.

As bad as things seemed, they would get worse.
DEATH AT CHOSIN RESERVOIR

In late November of 1950, members of the First Marine and Seventh Infantry Divisions, fighting in bitterly cold, snowy weather at the Chosin Reservoir area, were in serious trouble. Desperately attempting to break out of a Chinese Communist encirclement, they unsuccessfully tried to join forces.

Some frostbitten Marines and soldiers survived. Many others did not .  The CCF's deadly trap near Chosin had succeeded.

American combat engineers, still in North Korea, tried to slow the Chinese advance (another Chinese-perspective link) by placing satchel charges on a railroad bridge near P'yongyang. It did little good, for the moment, and American forces retreated in December of 1950. Even naval successes included losses as bad weather further endangered UN forces.

In late December of 1950, Chinese forces crossed the 38th Parallel into South Korean territory.
STALEMATE

The government of North Korea may have thought its invasion of South Korea would intimidate the United Nations into giving the North what it wanted: reunification of the Korean peninsula under its control. But such was not the case.

Instead of requesting North Korea to negotiate, the United Nations launched a limited offensive beginning in the late spring of 1951. Sometimes the North Koreans and the Chinese were successful; other times the South Koreans and their allies prevailed.

UN interdiction bombing of enemy supply centers, troop concentrations and communication lines deprived the other side of sorely needed supplies. But it wasn't enough to end the conflict.

The U.S. Air Force used B29s, among other planes, to bomb enemy targets. By November of 1952, B-26 "Invaders" on night-intruder missions had helped to destroy more than 53,000 North Korean vehicles. But it was not enough to end the conflict.
HEARTBREAK RIDGE

Of many casualties, stemming from a stalemate where neither side won appreciable ground, one event stands out.  It was the battle for "Heartbreak Ridge," in September of 1951.

The result was disastrous for the UN allies - especially for the United States.  This summary of the battle explains why:

    The attack began on 13 September and quickly deteriorated into a familiar pattern. First, American aircraft, tanks, and artillery would pummel the ridge for hours on end, turning the already barren hillside into a cratered moonscape. Next, the 23d's infantrymen would clamber up the mountain's rocky slopes, taking out one enemy bunker after another by direct assault. Those who survived to reach the crest arrived exhausted and low on ammunition. Then the inevitable counterattack would come - wave after wave of North Koreans determined to recapture the lost ground at any cost. Many of these counterattacks were conducted at night by fresh troops that the enemy was able to bring up under the shelter of neighboring hills. Battles begun by bomb, bullet, and shell were inevitably finished by grenade, trench knife, and fist as formal military engagements degenerated into desperate hand-to-hand brawls. Sometimes dawn broke to reveal the defenders still holding the mountaintop. Just as often, however, the enemy was able to overwhelm the tired and depleted Americans, tumbling the survivors back down the hill where, after a brief pause to rest, replenish ammunition, and absorb replacements, they would climb back up the ridge to repeat the process all over again.

The battle progressed in the same manner, day and night, for two weeks.

One after another, wearied units of men succumbed to the strain until "the 23rd Infantry as a whole was fairly well shattered." On September 27, the Division's new commander, Major General Robert N. Young, stopped the "fiasco" on Heartbreak Ridge. Temporarily.

To hold Heartbreak Ridge, the Americans needed to cut off, and destroy, the North's reinforcements. They also needed a better road so they could effectively assault the ridge with Sherman tanks.

Some of the soldiers, under enemy fire, dug an improved road, free of mines. By October 10, all was ready. A costly victory was about to begin.

    The sudden onslaught of a battalion of tanks racing up the valley took the enemy by surprise. By coincidence, the thrust came just when the Chinese 204th Division was moving up to relieve the North Koreans on Heartbreak. Caught in the open, the Chinese division suffered heavy casualties from the American tanks. For the next five days the Shermans roared up and down the Mundung-ni Valley, over-running supply dumps, mauling troop concentrations, and destroying approximately 350 bunkers on Heartbreak and in the surrounding hills and valleys. A smaller tank-infantry team scoured the Sat'ae- ri Valley east of the ridge, thereby completing the encirclement and eliminating any hope of reinforcement for the beleaguered North Koreans on Heartbreak.

Before the fighting was over on October 13, when French soldiers captured the last Communist bastion on the ridge, thousands of men were dead or injured. The 2d Division, with its attached French battalion, suffered at least 3,700 casualties. The North Koreans and their Chinese supporters lost even more - an estimated 25,000 dead or injured.

It wasn't just at Heartbreak Ridge where UN forces were fighting that summer and fall. By late October, UN operations had secured most of the "commanding ground along the length of the front." Holding that ground cost approximately 40,000 UN casualties. But because the United Nations Command had taken the offensive, refusing to back down, it was clear to North Korea and its allies that more losses would ensue if the fighting continued.

The parties returned to the bargaining table.
KOREAN WAR PICTURES

By the time North and South Korea returned to the bargaining table, both sides (and their respective allies) had sustained many casualties and had spent huge amounts of money fighting to an impasse. Rare photographs from the U.S. National Archives, presented here in chronological order, provide some evidence of the fierce fighting and its consequences. (View the pictures as a slide-presentation, below right at the camera tag.)

    American men from the 24th Infantry Regiment move up to the firing line on July 18, 1950.

    Trying to disrupt North Korea's supply lines, U.S. Air Force B-29s dropped ten tons of bombs on two railroad bridges forty miles north of Pyongyang. (July 27, 1950)

    Although America had no bases in Korea at the start of the conflict, and very few available medical services, quick air evacuation helped to save lives and boost morale. (July 28, 1950)

    Thousands of American troops arrive in Korea on 6 August 1950, as part of the UN effort to assist South Korea.

    On 28 August 1950, a grief-stricken American infantryman mourns the loss of his buddy while a nearby medic fills out the paperwork.

    In September, 1950, U.S. Marines engaged in combat in Seoul while a machine-gun crew fires at fleeing targets in the captured city of Waegwan.

    A woman searches through the rubble of Seoul on November 1, 1950.

    Young children (a homeless brother and sister) try to find food and keep warm in the wreckage of Seoul's railroad yards. (November 17, 1950)

    While trains were used to transport American soldiers and their equipment during the Korean War, U.S. and other U.N. forces targeted trains in North Korea. Here, U.S. forces attack rail cars south of Wonsan, North Korea, an east-coast port city.  (1950)

    Korean refuges, on their way south, trudge through the snow and ice outside Kangning on January 8, 1951.

    In January of 1951, B-29s of the U.S. Far East Air Forces participated in round-the-clock attacks on strategic Chinese military targets in North Korea.

    Paratroopers, packed into a C-119 "Flying Boxcar," routinely flew to "drop zones" as they began actual or practice airborne assaults.

    The UN weapon North Koreans feared the most, according to prisoner interrogation, was the napalm fire bomb. In August of 1951, two napalm bombs just released from shackles underneath the wing of an F-51 "Mustang," are on their way to an industrial target.

    One F-80 "Shooting Star" banks sharply as it lines up a June, 1951 target while another prepares to drop 150 gallons of napalm (75 gallons in each bomb) over a separate target.

    Commandoes of the 41st Royal British Marines plant demolition charges along the tracks of enemy supply lines. (April 10, 1951)

    A Korean girl, with her brother on her back, tries to make her way to safety on June 9, 1951.

    Torrential rains interfered with, but did not stop, UN bombing missions.

    A high-velocity rocket, sent to its target by an F-9F "Pantherjet," in August of 1951.

    Peace talks at Kaesong, Korea, did not end the conflict in 1951.

    U.S. Air Force B-26 "Night Intruders" carried out daily bombing runs, even in bad weather, in an effort to disrupt enemy supply lines.

    Supply warehouses and dock facilities - in the North Korean east-coast port of Wonsan - are destroyed by para-demolition bombs dropped from B-26 Invaders, circa 1951. 

    Korean women and children search the rubble of Seoul for anything that can be used, or burned, as fuel.  (November 1, 1950)

    Despite assurances they would specially mark structures that housed UN prisoners of war, North Korean officials failed to do so for buildings situated near Chiktong. The circled areas reveal unidentified men waving at a low-flying, unarmed American reconnaissance plane. (March, 1952)

    On May 8, 1952 an F-80 drops another napalm bomb.

    President Truman, already reluctant to commit American forces to fight with the United Nations when South Korea first asked for American help, was beside himself by the spring of 1952. His diary entry for May 18 reveals a President distraught over promises made (then broken) by his Communist opposition.  He was also extremely concerned with the way UN prisoners of war were being treated.

    F-86 "Sabre" jets of the 51st Fighter Interceptor Wing flew over Korea's mountainous terrain in October of 1952.

    C-124 cargo planes, capable of carrying 135 patients, transported critically wounded UN personnel to Tokyo. (October, 1952)

    In the spring of 1953, the UN and North Korea agreed to repatriate Prisoners of War. "Freedom Village" welcomed back UN POWs at Munsan-ni.

    On 21 September 1953, a North Korean pilot flew a MiG 15 to a US Air Force base at Kimpo, near Seoul. He had defected.

    The inevitable tragedy of war - death and life-changing injuries - also characterized the Korean Conflict.  Executed prisoners-of-war, homeless children, victims of massacres and war atrocities (this is a PDF link) were all part of what some scholars call "the forgotten war."

What took place in Korea, however, was not forgotten by those who were there. Clint Eastwood, a Korean-War veteran, has even made a film - "Gran Torino" - about one soldier named Walt Kowalski.
HOSTILITIES TODAY

The UN troops (Americans - pictured at the Pusan Perimeter in 1950 - and their counterparts from South Korea and 18 other countries), brought the Korean Conflict to a cease-fire. It was not a win or loss. It was a stalemate, although US soldiers were ecstatic when they heard the Armistice was signed on July 23, 1953.

Hostilities still exist. From the military history of the conflict:

    This was a great achievement, but it was not a job that, once done, could stand by itself. For while the armistice of 27 July 1953 ended the fighting in Korea, it had not truly ended the war. The armistice was just that - a temporary cease-fire - and not a treaty of peace. It reflected the realization by all parties that neither side had either the will or the means to compel the other to bow to its political agenda. Hence the warring parties had agreed to disagree - to stop the shooting and to transfer the war from the battlefield to the diplomatic field. There the conflict has remained, despite sporadic incidents and border clashes, for half a century.

The human cost, to reach this stalemate, was inconceivable. Civilian casualties, according to the official military history, were staggering:

    United Nations forces suffered over 559,000 casualties during the war, including approximately 94,000 dead. America's share of this bill totaled 36,516 dead and 103,284 wounded. The enemy had taken prisoner 7,245 Americans during the war. The UN estimated that Communist military casualties exceeded two million dead, wounded, and prisoners. Civilian losses were even more appalling-approximately one million South Korean and up to two million North Korean civilians either died, disappeared, or were injured during the course of the war, while millions more became refugees.

Korea is still divided. Nearly fifty years after the Armistice, South Korean civilians - for the first time - were allowed to cross the Demilitarized Zone for a 14 February 2003 tourist trip to the North.
NUCLEAR WEAPONS

Today, North Korea possesses nuclear weapons. That fact alone has heightened tensions between the DPRK and the United Nations.

Some of those nuclear weapons are capable of reaching Alaska. That fact alone has increased the rhetoric between the United States and North Korea.

It is believed North Korea has uranium-enrichment capability to complement the country's already existing mining and milling facilities plus its missile production sites. Laboratories developing, and plants producing, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction are also known to exist.

Ongoing tensions today are rooted in the unresolved issues and events of the Korean War:

    The inability of the two sides to resolve their differences has meant that the two Koreas and their allies have had to remain on a war footing along the inter-Korean border ever since. Fifty years after the North Korean invasion, Communist and United Nations soldiers still glare at each other across the demilitarized zone established in July 1953. Together with the South Koreans, U.S. Army troops continue to make up the bulk of the UN contingent in Korea. The burdens of protecting South Korea from the threat of renewed Communist aggression over the past half-century have been great for the United States. Billions of dollars have been spent and some additional lives have been lost, the latter as a result of sporadic Communist violations of the cease-fire.

But North Korea's reliance on itself to produce weapons of mass destruction are rooted in the political philosophy of Kim Il Sung, the now-deceased ruler whom the people still call their "Great Leader."
KIM IL SUNG

North Korea's political philosophy (popularized by its leader Kim Il Sung since about 1955) is known as chuch'e (frequently referred to as juche). It is, in theory, the application of Marxism-Leninism to the North Korean experience. It is, in practice, living one's life in a totally self-reliant country which is totally loyal to the country's leader. And it is impossible to even begin to understand life in North Korea without grasping what juche is all about.

The country's newspapers make the point. Kim Il Sung came to power in 1946, at the height of Stalin's authority. (It is sometimes said that North Korea is the last remaining Stalinist state in the world.) By the spring of 1981, Kim Il Sung was so firmly entwined in the daily production and fabric of North Korean society that its press published the following quotes:

    Kim Il Sung ... is the great father of our people....Long is the history of the word father being used as a word representing love and reverence ... expressing the unbreakable blood ties between the people and the leader. Father. This familiar word represents our people's single heart of boundless respect and loyalty.... The love shown by the Great Leader

In North Korea, Kim Il Sung is still regarded as the uniting force of the country and its people:

    His heart is a traction power attracting the hearts of all people and a centripetal force uniting them as one.... Kim Il Sung [here people are in line to see his birthplace] is the great sun and great man ... thanks to this great heart, national independence is firmly guaranteed.

How did the country's leader respond to such effusive statements? His 1992 New Year's message is a good summary:

    I take great pride in and highly appreciate the fact that our people have overcome the ordeals of history and displayed to the full the heroic mettle of the revolutionary people and the indomitable spirit of chuch'e Korea, firmly united behind the party . . . . No difficulty is insurmountable nor is any fortress impregnable for us when our party leads the people with the ever-victorious chuch'e-oriented strategy and tactics and when all the people turn out as one under the party's leadership.

When Kim Il Sung was no longer able to run the country, his son - the current leader, Kim Jung Il - took over. Even though no formal succession had been established (because of Kim Il Sung's popularity and national adulation), Kim Jung Il is now firmly in control. He also enjoys the benefits of chuch'e.

One is left with no reasonable doubt that Korea's current leader, like his father before him, intends to make sure North Korea has the battle power it needs to wage war both offensively and defensively.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content on third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.
VIETNAM WAR
STORY PREFACE

Story Summary

    On the deepest level,
    the legacy of Vietnam
    is the disruption of our story,
    of our explanation of the past
    and vision of the future.

    John Hellman
    Ohio State University

Rarely, in recent memory, has the United States been as bitterly divided as it was (and still is) over the Vietnam War. Young people (including teenagers) were sent to fight an enemy they did not know in a war they did not understand. Nearly 59,000 of them died.

Those who returned home did not receive a hero’s welcome. Some were taunted as "baby killers." Others carried physical and emotional scars of battle. Sent halfway around the world to fight someone else’s war, most were forever changed. America had lost her innocence.

Captured on film and sound recordings, the never-declared Vietnam War is still a vivid memory for those who fought it. But for those who were not there, the National Archives contain a wealth of images (some of them explicit) depicting the horrors of Vietnam. Web sites by veterans and the U.S. military (including audio clips of actual battles) fill in the gaps.

This story is a virtual journey back in time, to see the pictures and hear the sounds of war. It is dedicated to all the men and women who served their country in that Southeast Asian land.
WHY FIGHT?

By the time the war was over, America had committed 2.6 million troops to South Vietnam. Total casualties (including wounded) were horrendous: 365,000 for America; 5 million for Vietnam.

How did America get involved in Vietnam in the first place? Why didn’t the United States learn the same lessons the French had learned when the area was called "French Indochina?" It was, to oversimplify, a fight to prevent communism from spreading south in this largely agrarian country. But as Ho Chi Minh, the North Vietnamese leader, famously told the French in 1940:

    You can kill ten of my men for every one I kill of yours, but even at those odds, you will lose and I will win.

Some writers soundly criticize the war and argue it was a losing proposition from the very beginning. (Government documents, collectively referred to as "The Pentagon Papers," provide support for that conclusion.) Others argue it was a necessary step in winning the Cold War.

However history ultimately judges the events of war, the story of America in Vietnam begins in the 1950s. Initially providing limited assistance to France, President Eisenhower met with the leader of South Vietnam in 1957. Now free of French control, President Ngo Dinh Diem was seeking more aid for his recently independent country.

America provided expanded aid when President Kennedy first sent Air Force and Army military advisors to South Vietnam in 1961. The U.S. plan was NOT to stay in Vietnam. The plan was simply to advise Diem and his military how to ward off their neighbors to the north.

But those plans changed during 1962-1964.
A ONE-HANDED FIGHT

Many Americans questioned why the country went to war. While people grasped "the domino effect" (if one country falls to a communist revolt the neighboring countries may also fall), they doubted whether a small country in Southeast Asia had much to do with American interests.

According to President Johnson, however, U.S. officials believed fighting in Vietnam was

    ...guided by North Vietnam, and it is spurred by Communist China. Its goal is to conquer the south [of Vietnam], to defeat American power, and to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism.

If there really was a threat to American interests, people wondered why the U.S. military didn't invade communist-controlled North Vietnam. The logic was: If you want to keep northern guerillas from wreaking havoc in the south, stop them from leaving the north. But U.S. government officials were worried about China's reaction if the north were invaded. One such 1964 document, quoting Chinese officials, makes the point:

    The Chinese people are watching closely at all times the U.S. imperialist acts of aggression and adventurism... The Pacific Ocean may dry up and stone may rot, but the unity and fraternal friendship between the Chinese and Viet-Nam people will remain unbreakable and will exist forever.

Recent document releases from Soviet archives tend to support the concern that China may have gone to war with the United States had American troops invaded North Vietnam. Turns out there was a secret agreement, to that effect, between China and the North.

Because of this cautious approach to fighting the war, respected military men like General Norman Schwarzkopf (of Gulf War fame) have said America fought in Vietnam with one hand tied behind her back.
THE EARLY YEARS

Although America provided non-combat advisors to South Vietnam during the Kennedy Administration, some of those advisors were getting killed. Their families were extremely upset. President Kennedy attempted to explain his motives for involvement in Vietnam, but not everyone agreed with the White House and Pentagon decision makers.

Meanwhile ... the war of aggression, by the North against the South, was about to worsen, dramatically. Photos from the National Archives (and other web sites) document some of the events:

    A napalm strike, 1962.

    "Viet Cong" captives, 1962.

    South Vietnamese paratroopers during the initial phase of an air-ground strike against Viet Cong in Tay Ninh Province, 45 miles northwest of Saigon. (Note they are jumping from a USAF C-123 transport.)

    An aged Vietnamese couple is protected at a U.S. Marine Corps-sponsored refugee camp. The National Archives description states: "Hundreds of such Vietnamese families have been evacuated from Viet Cong terrorism to the center by Leathernecks of the 2nd Battalion, 3rd Marines Regiment, 3rd Marine Division."

By late summer, 1964, the role of America's military had dramatically expanded. No longer were U.S. troops merely giving advice and providing shelter. Events in the Gulf of Tonkin provided the Johnson Administration with a reason to drastically change the course of the war.

For the next 8½ years, Americans would die in Vietnam.
WAR ESCALATES

After Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which gave President Johnson the authority to conduct the war as he saw fit, the United States developed its "Vietnam Defense Campaign." As more Americans died in Southeast Asia, even more were drafted.

In 1965, after winning the presidency in his own right, LBJ gave speeches with titles like these:  "We Will Stand in Vietnam" and a "Pattern for Peace in Southeast Asia."

But while the President talked at home, trying to address the concerns of an increasingly upset country (and to explain his reasons for escalating America's involvement in Southeast Asia), bombs exploded overseas. As LBJ predicted:

    This will be a disorderly planet for a long time.

Decades later, the pictures and sounds of war are still haunting:

    Napalm bombs explode on Viet Cong structures south of Saigon.

    A Marine helicopter is hit by gunfire.

    "Known Viet Cong prisoners," wired together at the neck, are taken to a regimental collection point on July 25, 1965.

    "Check point Charlie" at Da Nang.

    Marines, during search and clear missions in August of 1965, take suspected Viet Cong as prisoners.

In 1966, America launched a "Vietnam Air Campaign." The F-4 Phantom II would soon become the workhorse of the war.
AIRCRAFT OVER VIETNAM

The F-4 was not the only fighter plane to fly sorties over Vietnam. Follow the links to inspect some of the more famous aircraft of the war, including Soviet-made MiGs piloted by the North Vietnamese.

American Planes:

    F-100 Super Sabre (used before the F-4)

    F-101 Voodoo

    F-104 Starfighter

    F-105 Thunderchief

    F-4 in flight

    F-4 Phantom II

    F-4G ("Advanced Wild Weasel")

    Huey Helicopters

    B-52 - the Stratofortress

    The mighty B-52

    Another B-52

    A-4 Skyhawk

    A-5 Vigilante

    A-6 Intruder

North Vietnamese Planes

    Another MiG-15

    MiG-17

    MiG-19

    MiG-19 in flight

    MiG-21

    MiG-21 on the runway

    Il-28 "Beagle"

By 1967, the United States launched its second phase of the "Vietnam Air Campaign." The sounds of war, with pilots too often in trouble, intensified throughout that year.
AIR AND GROUND ATTACKS - 1966-67

Fighting in Vietnam's civil war intensified as America aided the South:

    A Marine flame thrower tank in action.

    In March, 1966, the Viet Cong attacked a South Vietnamese village with particular ferocity. The U.S. Air Force airlifted villagers to a safe area near Saigon.

    The USS Enterprise cruised the waters of the Gulf of Tonkin. (Decades later, the ship was the subject of a major scandal involving its Commander, Captain Owen Honors.)

    Troops from "A" company, 1st Air Cavalry, on "house patrol," checked for North Vietnamese saboteurs.

    Marines bathed in a stream.

    Soldiers take a break and drink coconut milk during the search and seizure phase of "Operation Pershing."

    While a Marine sentry stands guard, his comrades celebrate an outdoor Mass.

    A familiar sight during the war: Carrying a wounded man from the scene of battle.

    The President and General Westmoreland visited troops at Cam Ranh Bay on December 23, 1967.

Unknown to LBJ and his generals, however, North Vietnam was planning a massive invasion of the south to coincide with "Tet" (the Vietnamese New Year). Called the "Tet Offensive," it was responsible for huge losses in the South and major draft increases in America. Most people believe it was the turning point of the Vietnam War.

Tet's terror was widespread. With little doubt, the worst events took place in the ancient city of Hue where the Viet Cong massacred thousands of people.
THE TET OFFENSIVE

If Americans could point to a single event that turned the country against the war in Vietnam it would, undoubtedly, be the coordinated attacked of the Tet Offensive. With television transmitting the sights and sounds of war into American living rooms, anyone who looked saw an escalating, damaging conflict. (The link takes you to an actual battle during Tet. You will need Real Audio.)

Worse, people saw pictures that enraged them - like the infamous execution of a Viet Cong prisoner in Saigon. They wanted to know: Is this what our boys are dying to protect? (Turns out the American public was not told key facts about the execution photo. The Viet Cong prisoner, in the picture, had murdered the family of the South Vietnamese general who was about to pull the trigger of his Smith & Wesson .38 revolver.)

What really happened at Hue? According to a Vietnamese account, a massacre of South Vietnamese people by the North took place after both sides had agreed to a New Year's break in the bombing and fighting. But it wasn't just the citizens of Hue who died. It is estimated that 210 Americans were killed and 1,360 were wounded in the fierce battle to free the former imperial city.

        A Marine carries an injured Vietnamese woman to the hospital during the battle for Hue.

        Resting on his tank during the Battle for Hue, a Marine takes a break.

        Two battle-weary Marines stop fighting for awhile.

        For Marines, "Home is where you dig it."

        Hue city officials, responsible for identifying victims of the Tet Offensive, arrange coffins before the funeral services.

        Churches sometimes providing safety for fighting Marines.

        Not much was left of Cholon, a suburb of Saigon, when the fighting stopped.

        "Field Ordnance! Incoming!"

        "Would appreciate it if you could shoot it now!"

        "We've got MiGs under...Come on back around!"

        A Viet Cong base camp in flames.

Nothing was the same after Tet. As more U.S. men received draft notices, the voices of American protest grew louder. The President (who had once opposed American involvement in Vietnam but escalated the conflict during his administration) faced significant opposition within his own political party.

On the 31st of March, 1968, the President requested national broadcast time.  He was about to tell the world about his decision:  He would not run for another term of office. (Follow the link to see him tell Americans: "I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President.")

Perhaps Tet had also defeated LBJ.
AMERICANS LEAVE

The American plan had always called for U.S. advisors to train South Vietnamese military to fight their own war with the North. That process was called "Vietnamization." (scroll down 50%) It intensified during 1969.

Even so, the fighting continued:

        A MedEvac helicopter near the demilitarized zone ("DMZ") recovers a wounded member of the 101st Airborne Division.

        Marines are dropped into 5-foot-high elephant grass.

        Worn-out combat boots reveal the effort of one soldier.

        When Major Kuster encountered a North Vietnamese MiG, he fired his 20mm cannon at point-blank range. He hit the left wing of the MiG near the fuselage. The major, and his F-105, passed 15-20 feet below the flaming MiG.

        Americans dropped leaflets urging guerillas and North Vietnamese people to defect to the South.

        Some of the leaflets provided a Safe Conduct Pass for defecting Viet Cong.

American troops were leaving Vietnam during 1971. The fighting continued, although it was not as intense. However, North Vietnam launched a major offensive into South Vietnam during 1972. The United States broke off peace discussions as a direct result.

Later in the year, President Nixon made one of his most controversial decisions as commander in chief. Deciding to literally bomb North Vietnam back to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered the heaviest bombing of the war to take place in Hanoi and Haiphong. The North agreed to resume peace talks on December 19, 1972.

One month later, in Paris, both sides agreed to a 9-point cease fire. (Follow the link to hear President Nixon make the announcement.) One month later, some very happy American prisoners of war returned home. Although the long and deadly struggle was over for the United States, it wasn't finished for the people of South Vietnam.

The fall of Saigon was barely two years off.
THE FALL AND THE WALL

The fighting, of course, didn't stop when America left Vietnam. By March 13, 1975, North Vietnamese troops were 35 miles north of Saigon. People from the south fled with their injured children. Roads became massive traffic jams. On March 29, 1975 the communists from the North were closing in on Da Nang.

By April, people tried to board helicopters transporting fleeing refugees to safety. Mobs, hoping for a seat in a chopper, showed up at the U.S. Embassy. Americans were also trying to get out of the country before Saigon fell. Sometimes a fist to the face was part of the door-closing process.

Bombs fell on the capital city as people scoured the ruins for survivors. Saigon fell on April 30, 1975 when North Vietnamese soldiers took over the Presidential Palace. On the same day, troops overran Tan Son Nhut (sometimes spelled Tan Son Nhat) air base.

Today Saigon, the former capital of South Vietnam, is called Ho Chi Minh City. Hanoi, the former capital of the North, is now the seat of government for the unified country.

"Vietnam vets," those Americans who fought in the war, returned to a divided country. (Scroll down on the links to hear popular music of the time, including the timeless For What It's Worth.) Many wondered how it was that fellow citizens (who never had to risk their lives) had "the guts" to scorn them. Drafted veterans had not asked to fight. Many did not want to go "to Nam" in the first place. Others joined various branches of the military because they were motivated by idealism and a sense of patriotic duty.

But for the first time in the history of the nation, thousands of Americans were contemptuous of fellow citizens who went to war at their government's behest. The country's collective anger about Vietnam was directed more at the people who fought than at the politicians and military leaders who ordered the fighting.

Bob Greene, the journalist who also writes for the Chicago Tribune, collected and verified stories from returning Vietnam vets. Readers leave his book Homecoming, now out of print, stunned and outraged. A quote from Tony J. (at page 30) makes the point:

    Well, I had to take this fellow's body to his wife - she was nineteen years old... I was helping the mortician take the casket out of the hearse. Of course I was in my dress uniform, medal and all that, and the American flag was over the casket and some guy walked by when we had it about halfway and the fool spit on it and said, "Good, he deserved to die." 

Not until later, after the veterans themselves built "The Wall" with private donations, did Americans really show support for the men and women who endured the unpopular struggle in Vietnam. Today, the Wall has become a sacred place.

Filled with the names of all 58,219 who fell, written in their order of sacrifice, it is often the site of grief and tears. It is where those who survived can speak to those who died. It is the spot where one can honor the memory of a buddy by leaving a memento that only had meaning between friends.

And, more than anything else, the Wall represents what Americans finally learned. A nation, if it is truly great, neither scorns nor disgraces the people who respond to their country's call.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content on third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.
USED AND RECOMMENDED SOURCES

A "primary source" is the best place to get first-hand information. A person who experiences an event, and gives an account of it, is a source of primary information. Maps, photographs, drawings, videotapes, diaries, letters, manuscripts and other similar items can be primary sources.

Someone who interprets primary sources - like a scholar, for example - is creating a secondary source. (See Yale University's web site for a good understanding of the differences between primary and secondary sources.)

It is our policy to link to primary source material whenever possible. That is the reason most of our links are to worldwide national archives, museums, universities, military and government sites as well as other institutions like historical societies and libraries. It is our aim to provide a virtual trip to reliable places where primary sources are maintained. We frequently link to scholarly sources as well. All links serve as footnotes to our stories.

Where helpful, we link to scholarly narratives that explain the subject, or issue, in more detail. Scholarly-narrative links - when we use them - usually appear near the end of our stories, when the reader is more prepared to explore them.

Each recommended link, embedded in the story, takes you directly to the source of the footnoted information. If you would like to visit the main page of the linked site, or to further explore its content, eliminate everything in the URL after the ".edu, .gov, .org," etc., and then press "enter." That will take you to the main site where you can then search for whatever additional information you may need.

All images hosted by AwesomeStories are either created by us or were found in the public domain. If we have, unwittingly, used copyrighted images of any sort, please let us know and we will immediately remove them. All other images in the site are direct-links to national archives, libraries, universities, government web sites, historical societies and other similar institutions. If you wish to use any of the images hosted by other web sites, you need to contact those institutions directly.

We have thoroughly researched appropriate links, but we can not be responsible for content at third-party sites. Wherever possible, people who really know the subject matter have reviewed the stories for accuracy. Our main objective is to help our visitors find their way to some of the best on-line information regarding the profiled subjects - and to have fun at the same time. We hope you have enjoyed your visit.

 
