Energy
Energy is the capacity for doing work. In physics, "work" has a more formal definition than in everyday life: it means the ability to exert a force through a distance. If you pick up this book, energy stored in molecular bonds inside your body is released to move the book's mass. The energy was stored in the molecules of the foods you ate and is released through a chemical reaction. Food provides the fuel that gives us energy.Similarly, whether we are talking about automobile engines or power plant boilers, we need to have a fuel with stored energy that can be released in a useable way. Fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas provide much of the energy we use in industry and in our personal lives. These fuels were created by geological processes over millions of years, as plants and marine microorganisms consisting largely of carbon became buried under the earth. These fossilized materials were eventually transformed into coal or oil by the high pressures and temperatures inside the planet.Because of the long time and extreme conditions needed to create fossil fuels, we cannot just replace them at will—they are a nonrenewable resource. Every time we pump oil from the ground we are depleting an irreplaceable natural resource. Eventually, we will exhaust the supplies of fossil fuels in the earth, and we will have to develop alternative energy sources to power our society. Exactly when we will run out of fossil fuels is a subject of great debate. A careful distinction must be made here between "reserves" and "resources." Reserves are defined as economically recoverable with known technology and within a price range close to the present price; resources are theoretical maximum potentials based on geological information, and include reserves. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) of the United States Department of Energy has estimated the worldwide coal resources at 1,083 billion tons; the oil reserve at approximately 1,200 billion barrels, with resources estimated at three trillion barrels; and the worldwide natural gas reserve at 5,500 trillion cubic feet . The nonprofit Corporation for Public Access to Science and Technology (CPAST) in St. Louis, Missouri, has estimated from earlier data published in the United States Department of Energy 1996 Annual Energy Review that these combined fossil fuels resources would last until the year 2111 if usage remained constant at 1995 levels. The EIA predicts that coal resources could last for 220 years at the current usage rates. Estimates change when new technology makes fuel that was previously considered "unrecoverable" suddenly accessible; these numbers should only be used as rough guidelines.
Transforming Energy into Work: Gasoline Engines and Steam Boilers 
Gasoline, which consists largely of hydrocarbon molecules—chains of connected carbon and hydrogen atoms—acts as a fuel in an automobile engine. It is a product of the distillation of raw petroleum. The energy that holds these carbon and hydrogen atoms together is stored in the bonds between each atom. 
In an automobile, gasoline is mixed with air in the combustion chamber of an engine cylinder, the mixture is compressed by a piston, and a spark from the spark plug ignites the mixture. The ideal chemical reaction for this process is:The energy is released in the form of heat, which causes the gases to expand and pushes the piston outward. The piston is connected to a rod and a crankshaft that ultimately transform the energy locked up in molecules into the revolution of wheels, setting your car in motion. The combustion products of carbon dioxide and water are expelled through the exhaust system into the atmosphere. 
Similarly, a boiler in a power plant relies on the release of energy from burning coal or natural gas to heat water and convert it into steam. The steam turns the blades of a turbine-powered generator that ultimately causes electrons to move through a wire, converting the energy from the fuel into electrical energy that can be used to power appliances in your home.In each of these cases, energy stored in chemical bonds is transformed into useful energy that can perform work.
Energy and Pollution 
In addition, the chemical reaction shown above is an ideal one, but conditions in the real world are usually far from ideal. If the right amounts of oxygen and gasoline are not present in the cylinder of a car engine (because of a dirty air filter or a faulty fuel injection system, for example), poisonous carbon monoxide can form. Similarly, some of the hydrocarbons might escape from the engine unburned, releasing pollutants such as methane into the air. Nitrogen from the air inside the cylinder can combine with oxygen to form the pollutants nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide, collectively know as NOxcompounds, which can be converted to ground-level ozone in the presence of sunlight. Even carbon dioxide—one of the "ideal" products of complete combustion in an engine or a power plant—has been identified as a "green-house gas" that is partially responsible for global warming. 
The coal used in power plants does not emerge from the ground as pure carbon. It is laced with varying amounts of different contaminants, including sulfur, which vary from coal mine to coal mine. These, too, can find their way into the atmosphere as pollutants when the coal is burned to heat the water in a boiler. Most notably, sulfur oxide, emitted into the air, converts to sulfuric.
Nuclear and Alternative Fuels 
Nuclear energy is not based on combustion of fuel. Rather, the energy is released as unstable radioactive compounds decay into more stable forms. For example, radioactive uranium 238 decays to uranium 235, releasing energy in the process. This energy can be used to heat water without burning coal or oil, so its use is therefore cleaner. However, radiation emitted in the event of an accident at a nuclear power plant could harm people and wildlife and contaminate the food supply. Nuclear waste, in the form of spent fuel rods, is a very long-term by-product of nuclear energy. 
Cleaner-burning fuels can be produced by processing agricultural products ("biomass") into ethanol. Thousands of acres of corn could be grown specifically for energy production, not consumption by people or animals. Because the ethanol that results comes from a controllable chemical distillation process, it is very pure and uncontaminated, and thus burns cleaner. Also, because a new crop can be grown every year, these are renewable energy sources. 
Hydropower, or the use of moving or falling water to generate energy, is one of the oldest technologies that still contributes significantly to our energy needs. Falling water was often used in old mills to turn a paddlewheel and move the heavy stones that were used to grind grain into flour. Later, the same concept was transferred to the production of electricity. Hydroelectric plants, such as the one in Niagara Falls, divert some of the water from the falls into the power plant. There the kinetic energy (the energy of objects in motion) of the falling water turns turbines and generates electricity that can be sold to residents and industrial users in the area.Solar power, wind power, and fuel cells powered by a reaction of hydrogen plus oxygen to form water are other alternative energy sources that are being explored.
Industry and Environment 
Suppose you are the owner of a manufacturing plant. You need large amounts of fuel to keep your plant running. To maximize your profits, you would like to purchase this fuel very cheaply. The cheapest option would be if the energy company could take the fuel straight from the ground and sell it to you "as is." But fossil fuels must be processed before they can be used. Petroleum products must go to the refinery to be separated into various components such as gasoline and diesel fuel, and contaminants such as sulfur have to be minimized. All these processing steps add cost to the fuel. 
Even after you obtain a relatively clean fuel, your manufacturing process may result in pollutants that could find their way into the atmosphere or rivers. Again, efforts to clean up these emissions will cost you money. Chemical systems that scrub the pollutants from the emissions, or filters that capture particulates, are expensive and raise your production costs.But there may be people who are more concerned about a healthy environment than your profits. They might insist that you take whatever steps are necessary on both the inlet (fuel) side and the outlet (emissions and runoff) side to make the world a better, safer place to live. They may lobby to have laws passed that require you to clean up any emissions from your plant.You want a clean environment too, but even the most environmentally conscious company must make a profit to stay in business. Environmental regulations add to the cost of producing your product, but this is no different than all the other costs you incur (raw materials, labor, transportation, marketing, etc.). If all competitors in an industry are constrained by the same regulations, then the playing field is level; every company in the field may have to raise its prices to make up for the added costs of compliance, but prices for similar products should remain competitive. However, if competitors in foreign countries are able to operate without these same environmental regulations, they can market their products more cheaply, and make it more difficult for domestic producers to stay in business. It is this kind of imbalance in regulations that lead to job losses, and give the mistaken impression that we must choose either jobs or the environment. If governments can maintain a level playing field in environmental regulations, we can have both jobs and a clean environment worldwide.The situation may be further confused by an argument among scientists and health professionals as to how much of a health problem a certain chemical represents. Something that seems safe today may be discovered to be a health risk ten years from now. Until we understand how various chemicals interact with our bodies, there may be room for discussion on allowable levels of emission.
Conserving Energy 
In light of the depletion of nonrenewable resources, it is important that we try to conserve energy whenever possible. Because the transformation of fuel into useful energy inevitably creates pollutants, we must reduce our energy consumption to reduce pollution. Using your air conditioner less during the summer by setting the thermostat higher can reduce the demand for electricity experienced by your energy provider. Your energy provider can burn less fossil fuel and still meet the needs of its customers, resulting in less pollution. Carpooling removes unnecessary vehicles from the road, reducing gasoline consumption and air pollution. Energy conservation efforts thus help at both ends of the cycle: they slow down the depletion of fuel reserves and, at the same time, clean up the environment.
The Politics of Energy 
Because the conditions necessary for the creation of fossil fuels varied geographically throughout the earth's history, fossil fuels are not distributed evenly around the globe. Significant concentrations of oil occur in the Middle East, the North Sea, Russia, Texas, and Alaska, for example. Countries that control the world's access to oil have economic power over countries that need their oil, which can lead to political tensions. The "energy crisis" created by the OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) nations in the 1970s, when they artificially reduced the supply of oil available on the world market, was a display of this political and economic power. Iraq's attack on Kuwait in 1991 to take over Kuwaiti oil fields led to the first Persian Gulf War. As long as there is uneven access to energy sources throughout the world, political tensions over the availability and cost of energy will continue.
Energy Technologies
Energy technologies are techniques for moving energy from a source to a point of use, for transforming it from an original source-form to an end-use form, or both. They are often lumped into two groups, conventional and alternative. Conventional energy technologies derive energy from fuels, either fossil (coal, oil, natural gas) or nuclear (uranium, plutonium). These technologies first turn the energy latent in fuel into heat, then transform some percentage of that heat into another, more useful form of energy (or apply the heat directly, as to warming a building, smelting ore, or the like). Approximately 90% of present-day energy use is provided by conventional sources.Alternative energy technologies, in contrast, harvest energy from renewable, natural flows rather than from fuels. Technologies that collect energy from sunlight, wind, wave action, or plants are considered alternative energy technologies. (An exception to the alternative/conventional classification scheme is hydroelectric power, the generation of electricity from water flowing downhill. Hydroelectric power, although it harvests an energy flux from the environment rather than burning a fuel, is usually considered conventional because it has been utilized on an industrial scale for so long.)
Many energy technologies, conventional and alternative, produce electricity. Electricity is a uniquely useful form of energy, not a source of energy. Thus, the belief that an electric-powered device such as an electric car is "clean" is only correct when the electricity that it uses is produced cleanly. Most electricity is produced by coal-burning power plants or nuclear power plants; the former involves environmentally destructive mining and air pollution, while the latter involves some environmentally destructive mining and produces growing inventories of radioactive material that might be released to the environment either accidentally or deliberately, as by wartime or terrorist action. Therefore, there is nothing intrinsically "clean" about electricity. About 51% of United States electricity is currently produced by coal-burning power plants, 21% by nuclear power plants, 17% by natural-gasfired power plants, 6% from hydroelectric dams, 3% from oil-fired power plants, and 2% from wind, wood, and photovoltaics.Several national-security issues arise with respect to energy technologies:
 Self-sufficiency. An energy source that must be imported, such as oil, is vulnerable to cutoff by hostile parties. This was demonstrated by the oil crisis of 1973, when the Organization of Oil Producing Countries (OPEC) suddenly quadrupled its oil prices from about $3 to about $13 per barrel (1 barrel = 42 United States gallons or 159 L) in retaliation for United States support of Israel. This triggered an economic crisis in the United States and elsewhere. In contrast, the United States has large domestic stocks of coal and uranium, and is not vulnerable to a cutoff of these energy sources; nor is it entangled politically or militarily with foreign sources of these fuels, as is the case with oil. (However, coal and uranium produce electricity, which, unlike oil, does not yet run affordable cars; therefore, coal and uranium cannot, at present, significantly decrease United States dependence on foreign oil.) Renewable or alternative energy resources also have the advantage that they are not imported.Fragility. Energy sources that can be disrupted at central points or along key transmission routes are more vulnerable to terrorism and war than distributed energy sources. For example, much of the United States electrical grid—a tuned, interdependent, dynamic network—could be blacked out for days or weeks by the destruction of relatively few switching points, control centers, or transmission lines. Locally-harvested alternative-energy sources such as rooftop photovoltaics or woodlots are immune to large-scale disruption, but cannot serve all purposes; rooftop photovoltaics are still expensive relative to grid electricity, and there are no wood-burning computers or refrigerators. Between the resilience of locally-produced energy supplies and the brittleness of the coal- and nuclear-fueled electrical grid lie the energy systems that rely on distributed stocks of fuels such as gasoline and natural gas. Although these energy technologies still rely on a few centralized refineries or long-distance pipelines, they are tolerant of temporary or local damage.Hazardousness. Some energy sources are hazardous due to toxicity or explosive potential. Standard nuclear power plants cannot explode, but they do contain large inventories of radionuclides that could be deliberately released by an enemy; after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission ordered immediate, drastic increases in security for nuclear power plants. A less well-known source of vulnerability is liquefied natural gas, which is imported to the United States in large tanker ships and stored in centralized tank farms for national distribution via long-distance pipelines.Pollution. Pollution or greenhouse-gas emissions that harm a country's citizens, environment, and economy can be thought of as a danger to national security. All sources of energy, including wind and solar, require the extraction and refinement of metals and other substances, some toxic; conventional sources further require the extraction and (often) refinement of fuels and either (a) release combustion products to the atmosphere or (b) require the near-perfect, near-perpetual containment of increasing quantities of radioactive materials.Adequacy. Whatever combination of energy technologies is used by a modern industrial state, its energy system must provide sufficient energy. The present energy system of the U.S.—primarily gasoline for transport, coal and nuclear (primarily) for electrical generation, and oil for heating some buildings—does supply adequate energy; however, some experts maintain that given increased end-use efficiency, the industrialized countries could shift almost entirely to alternative energy sources in about 50 years. If technically feasible this would increase self-sufficiency and decrease fragility, hazardousness, and pollution, but is not likely to occur without a major shock, or several major shocks, to the conventional energy system, as for example a major terrorist act involving a nuclear power plant, a second oil embargo, or radical climate change. In the meantime, prices are falling slowly for alternative energy sources, especially wind and solar, making them increasingly competitive on the market with conventional electricity sources. Gasoline continues to be the only affordable energy source for most vehicles, with the mileage of the United States fleet recently declining rather than rising.One change in the present U.S. energy system that, if technically feasible, would increase self-sufficiency by decreasing dependence on oil and which would also decrease pollution is a long-term shift (probably only partial) to hydrogen "burned" in fuel cells. Fuel cells are chemical reactors in which a fuel (not necessarily hydrogen) combines with oxygen to create electricity, with water vapor as the only by-product. Hydrogen is available on Earth only in chemically stable combination with other substances (e.g., in H2; it is therefore not a primary fuel but, like electricity, a form of energy, and must be manufactured either by using electricity to split water molecules or by chemical processing of a fuel such as coal. Although hydrogen is not currently available in large quantities and fuel cells remain expensive (i.e., about 10 times as expensive, per horsepower delivered, as a conventional automobile engine), U.S. President George W. Bush has announced two funding programs for hydrogen fuel cells: Freedom Car (2002) to accelerate development of hydrogen-powered automobiles, and Freedom Fuel (2003), to accelerate development of techniques for manufacturing hydrogen from coal. Freedom Car receives about $50 million per year, and Freedom Fuel has been allotted $144 million per year for five years. The announced goal of the twin programs is to make fuel-cell powered cars commercially available in 20 years. The United States is working in partial cooperation with the European Union, which also seeks to develop hydrogen-powered fuel cells for cars. The European Union's program, unlike the U.S. Freedom Fuel program, seeks to produce hydrogen using electricity generated by wind and solar power.
Alternative energy sources 
Alternative energy is energy provided from sources other than the three fossil fuels: coal, oil, and natural gas. Alternative sources of energy include nuclear power, solar power, wind power, water power, and geothermal energy, among others. 
Current sources of energy 
As of the beginning of the twenty-first century, fossil fuels (fuels formed over millions of years from the remains of plants and animals) provide more than 85 percent of the total energy used around the world. In the United States, two-thirds of the electricity is currently generated by burning fossil fuels like coal, gas, and oil. According to the U.S. Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency, such combustion pumped almost 2.5 billion tons (2.3 billion metric tons) of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere in 1999. Over the last 150 years. some 270 billion tons (245 billion metric tons) of carbon in the form of carbon dioxide have been released into the air as a result of the burning of fossil fuels. 
Active solar heating: A solar energy system that uses pumps or fans to circulate heat captured from the Sun. 
Fossil fuel: A fuel such as coal, oil, or natural gas that is formed over millions of years from the remains of plants and animals. 
Heat energy: The energy produced when two substances that have different temperatures are combined. 
Passive solar heating: A solar energy system in which the heat of the Sun is captured, used, and stored by means of the design of a building and the materials from which it is made. 
Photovoltaic cell: A device made of silicon that converts sunlight into electricity.
Radioactivity: The property possessed by some elements of spontaneously emitting energy in the form of particles or waves by disintegration of their atomic nuclei.
Solar collector: A device that absorbs sunlight and collects solar heat.
Turbine: An engine that turns in a circular motion when force, such as moving water, is applied to its parts.
Fossil fuels supply energy for transportation, industrial manufacturing, heating of buildings, and the production of electricity. However, the reserves of coal, oil, and natural gas are limited; in fact, they are called nonrenewable resources because once the supplies that are available are used up, they cannot be replaced. It is predicted that at the current rate of energy consumption, available reserves of oil and natural gas will be greatly decreased during the twenty-first century. Coal is more plentiful, but its use can contribute to environmental problems such as global warming (an increase in Earth's temperature over time). Because of growing energy demands in developing nations as well as the energy needs of industrialized societies, it will become increasingly necessary to turn to alternative sources of energy in the future. Conserving energy and using it more efficiently are additional ways of addressing the energy problem.
Nuclear power
Nuclear power is an alternative energy source that can be obtained from either the splitting of the nuclei of atoms (nuclear fission) or the combining of the nuclei of atoms (nuclear fusion). In either of these two reactions, great amounts of energy are released. Nuclear power plants use a device called a nuclear reactor in which uranium or plutonium atoms are split in controlled fission reactions. The heat energy released is captured and used to generate electricity. As of 2000, there were 110 operating nuclear power plants in the United States. France relies on nuclear power for more than 70 percent of its electricity production.
Controlled nuclear fusion is believed by many scientists to be the ultimate solution to the world's energy problems. The energy released in fusion reactions is many times greater than that released in fission reactions. To date, however, the technology has not been developed to make use of this source of energy.
Although nuclear power is a clean, cheap, and relatively safe means of providing energy, public concern over safety issues has brought the construction of new nuclear power plants to a virtual halt in the United States. The nuclear accidents at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania in 1979 and at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Ukraine in 1986 (in which a large amount of radioactive material was released into the atmosphere) prompted fears of similar disasters occurring elsewhere. In addition, there is the problem of storing radioactive nuclear waste safely so that it does not pose a threat to humans or the environment.
Water power
The power of moving water, or hydropower, is a clean and efficient means of generating electricity. Water falling through dams powers water turbines that are hooked up with electric generators. The energy is then distributed across vast electrical networks. Canada, the United States, and Brazil lead the world in hydroelectricity production. The building of dams has an environmental impact, however, causing flooding of land above the dams and disrupting the normal flow of water below them, which can affect the natural ecosystem (a community of organisms and their environment) of a river.
Wind power
Wind power is one of the earliest forms of energy used by humankind. Windmills were used on farms in the early part of the twentieth century to pump water and generate electricity. Now considered an alternative energy source, wind power is being harnessed by modern windmills with lighter, stronger blades. In states such as California, New Hampshire, Oregon, and Montana, up to several hundred windmills may operate together (called wind farms) in open areas with steady winds. Single giant windmills capable of providing electricity to several thousand homes are also operating in the United States. Several power companies have plans to build large-scale wind farms in Texas, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and Minnesota, and smaller plants in Pennsylvania, Connecticut,
and New York before 2020. By that year, the U.S. Department of Energy hopes the contribution of wind power to electrical generation nationwide will be increased by 5 percent. With new technologies being developed to improve windmill performance and efficiency, wind power is a promising, clean, cheap, and abundant source of energy for the future.
Solar power
Solar power, or energy from the Sun, is a free, abundant, and nonpolluting source of energy. Solar energy can be used to heat buildings and water and to produce electricity. However, the Sun does not always shine, and the process of collecting solar energy and storing it for use at night and on cloudy days is difficult and expensive.Solar energy systems can be either passive or active. In a passive solar heating system, a building captures and stores the Sun's heat because of the way it is designed, the materials it is made of, or the heat-absorbing structures it possesses. An example of a passive system is a building with large windows facing south (that allow sunlight to enter) and with thick walls that store heat and release it at night.
Active solar energy systems use pumps or fans to circulate heat obtained by solar collectors. A solar collector is a device that absorbs the
energy of the Sun and converts it to heat for heating buildings and water. Flat-plate collectors are mounted to the roofs of buildings and used for space heating. They are made of a heat-absorbing plate, such as aluminum or copper, covered by glass or plastic. Water or air circulating in the collector absorbs heat from the plate and is carried to a heat storage tank. The stored heat is circulated or blown over cold rooms using pumps or fans. A conventional heating system is used as a backup when solar heat is not available. Solar heating of water is accomplished using a collector, a hot water storage tank, and a pump to circulate water.
Sunlight can be captured and converted into electric power using solar cells (called photovoltaic cells). Solar cells are usually made up of silicon and can convert light to electric current. They are used in space satellites to provide electricity, as well as in watches and pocket calculators. Solar panels made up of solar cells have been installed in some homes, and solar cells are used as energy sources in lighthouses, boats, and other remote locations.
Solar power plants—using energy from the Sun to produce steam for driving turbines to generate electricity—could potentially replace fuel-driven power plants, producing energy without any environmental hazards. In California, a solar power facility—using collectors made of large motorized mirrors that track the Sun—produces electricity to supplement the power needs of the Los Angeles utilities companies.
Geothermal energy
Geothermal energy is the natural heat generated in the interior of Earth and released from volcanoes and hot springs or from geysers that shoot out heated water and steam. Reservoirs of hot water and steam under Earth's surface can be accessed by drilling through the rock layer. The naturally heated water can be used to heat buildings, while the steam can be used to generate electricity. Steam can also be produced by pumping cold water into rock that is heated by geothermal energy; such steam is then used to produce electric power.
Geothermal energy is an important alternative energy source in areas of geothermal activity, including parts of the United States, Iceland, and Italy. Homes in Boise, Idaho, are heated using geothermal energy, as are most buildings in Iceland. The Geysers in California is the largest steam field in the world and has been used to produce electricity since 1960. Unlike solar energy and wind power, however, the use of geothermal energy has an environmental impact. Chemicals in the steam contribute to air pollution, and water mixed with the steam contains dissolved salts that can corrode pipes and harm aquatic ecosystems.
Tidal and ocean thermal energy
The rise and fall of ocean tides contain enormous amounts of energy that can be captured to produce electricity. In order for tidal power to be effective, however, the difference in height between low and high tides needs to be at least 20 feet (6 meters), and there are only a few places in the world where this occurs. A tidal station works like a hydropower dam, with its turbines spinning as the tide flows through them in the mouths of bays or estuaries (an arm of the sea at the lower end of a river), generating electricity. By the end of the twentieth century, tidal power plants were in operation in France, Russia, Canada, and China.Ocean thermal energy uses the temperature change between the warmer surface waters and the colder depths to produce electrical power. 
Biomass energy
Certain biomass (the sum total of living and dead plants, animals, and microorganisms in an area) can be used as fuel to produce heat energy. Wood, crops and crop waste, and wastes of plant, mineral, and animal matter are part of the biomass. The biomass contained in garbage can be burned to produce heat energy or can be allowed to decay and produce methane (natural gas). In western Europe, over 200 power plants burn rubbish to produce electricity. Methane can be converted to the liquid fuel methanol, and ethanol can be produced from fermentable crops such as sugar cane and sorghum. Adequate air pollution controls are necessary when biomass is burned to limit the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Other sources of alternative energy
Other sources of alternative energy include hydrogen gas and fuel cells. Hydrogen gas is a potential source of fuel for automobiles, as well as a potential source of energy for heating buildings and generating electricity. Although hydrogen is not readily available, it can be produced by separating water into hydrogen and oxygen in a process called electrolysis. A disadvantage of using hydrogen gas as fuel is that it is highly flammable.
Fuel cells are devices that produce electric power from the interaction of hydrogen and oxygen gases. They are used to provide electricity in spacecraft and are a potential alternative energy source for heating buildings and powering automobiles.
Energy conservation
Energy conservation plays an extremely important role in reducing unnecessary energy consumption. Improving energy efficiency is the best way to meet energy demands without adding to air and water pollution. Designing gas-saving automobiles, using fluorescent lightbulbs, recycling, raising the setting for house air conditioners, improving the efficiency of appliances, and properly insulating buildings are some of the ways energy can be conserved.
Renewable Energy 
Renewable energy is energy that is regenerative or, for all practical purposes, virtually inexhaustible. It includes solar energy, wind energy, hydropower, biomass (derived from plants), geothermal energy (heat from the earth), and ocean energy. Renewable energy resources can supply energy for heating and cooling buildings, electricity generation, heat for industrial processes, and fuels for transportation. The increased use of renewable energy could reduce the burning of fossil fuels (coal, petroleum, and natural gas), eliminating associated air-pollution and carbon dioxide emissions, and contributing to national energy independence and economic and political security.
Historical and Current Use 
Before the 1900s, the world as a whole used wood (including wood converted to charcoal) for heat in homes and industry, vegetation for feeding draft animals, water mills for grinding grain and milling lumber, and wind for marine transportation and grain milling and water pumping. By the 1920s, however, coal and petroleum had largely replaced these energy sources in industrialized countries, although wood for home heating and hydroelectric power generation remained in wide use. At the end of the twentieth century, nearly 90 percent of commercial energy supply was from fossil fuels. 
Renewable energy, however, makes important contributions to world energy supplies. Hydroelectric power is a major source of electrical energy in many countries, including Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, Norway, and Russia. In developing countries many people do not have access to or cannot afford electricity or petroleum fuels and use biomass for their primary energy needs. For example, most rural people in Africa use wood, scrub, grass, and even animal dung for cooking fuel. Small-scale renewable energy technologies are often the only practical means of supplying electricity in rural areas of these countries. The table indicates the relative consumption of energy sources in the United States.
Major Types of Renewable Energy Sources 
Biomass. Biomass includes wood, agricultural crops and residues, municipal refuse, wood and paper products, manufacturing process waste, and human and livestock manure. It can be used to heat homes and buildings, produce electricity, and as a source of vehicle fuel. Wood and paper manufacturers and sugar mills use biomass residues for process heat and electricity production. There are power plants that burn wood, agricultural residues, and household trash to produce electricity. Biogas (composed of methane, carbon dioxide, and other gases) produced by decomposing biomass in anaerobic conditions is captured from landfills, municipal sewage treatment plants, and livestock waste management operations. This gas can be used for heat or to generate electricity. 
Ethanol is used as a transportation fuel in the United States, Brazil, and a few other countries. Nearly all the fuel ethanol in the United States is made from corn, although it can also be produced from other sources, including wastepaper. There is a small but growing consumption of "biodiesel" made from grain oils and animal fats.Geothermal systems. Geothermal energy (heat from the earth) created deep beneath the earth's surface is tapped to produce electricity in twenty-two countries, some of which include the United States, Iceland, Italy, Kenya, and the Philippines. Geothermal hot springs can also heat buildings, greenhouses, fish farms, and bathing pools.Hydropower. Hydropower, produced from flowing water passing through hydroelectric turbines , is the leading renewable energy source, contributing to approximately 9 percent of the electricity generated in the United States. Most hydropower is produced at large dams, although there are many small systems operating around the world, such as the small hydropower plant in Namche Bazar, Nepal, which provides power for the tourist and market town near Mt. Everest. The production of hydroelectricity from year to year varies with precipitation.Ocean energy. The world's oceans are a vast and practically untapped source of energy. There are a few operating wave and tidal power plants around the world, and several experimental ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC) plants have also been built. A small wave power plant in Norway captures water from waves in a dam and lets the water out through a turbine. A 240-megawatt tidal power facility on the Rance River in France produces electricity as tidal flows move back and forth through turbines located at the mouth of the river. In Hawaii, a small OTEC plan was built which uses the temperature of warm surface water to evaporate cold seawater in a vacuum to produce steam that turns a turbine and generator.
Solar energy systems. The simplest uses of solar energy are for drying crops, and heating buildings and water. Solar-heated homes and solar water heaters can be found in nearly every country around the world. Crops can be simply laid in the sun to dry, or more sophisticated collectors can be used to heat air to dry food stored on drying racks. Solar water heaters use collectors to heat water that is stored in a tank for later use. Homes can be heated by using a masonry floor to absorb sunshine coming through windows, or by using solar collectors to heat a large tank of water than can be distributed for heating at night. 
Concentrated sunlight can be used to produce high-temperature heat and electricity. Nine concentrating solar parabolic trough power plants, with a combined generation capacity of 354 megawatts, are located in the Mojave Desert in California. (A megawatt is 1 million watts, or 1,000 kilowatts.) The U.S. Department of Energy built and tested a ten-megawatt solar thermal central receiver power plant near Barstow, California, which operated successfully for about seven years. Another type of concentrating solar thermal power system is a parabolic dish. Systems with a capacity of up to twenty-five kilowatts have been developed. 
Photovoltaic (PV) systems are based on solar electric cells, which convert sunlight directly to electricity. They can be used to power hand calculators or in large systems on buildings. Many PV systems are installed in remote areas where power lines are expensive or unfeasible, although the number of systems connected to electricity transmission systems is increasing, and range in size from 1 to several kilowatts on houses, to systems over one hundred kilowatts on large buildings. PV systems are very suitable for use in developing countries where people have no electricity from electric power lines.Wind energy systems. Water-pumping and grain-milling windmills have evolved into electric power turbines. There are now tens of thousands of wind turbines operating around the world. They range in size from tiny turbines on the back of sailboats to very large units that can produce.
The Future for Renewable Energy 
Renewable energy has many advantages that will help to maintain and expand its place in world energy supply:
Renewable energy resources are enormous—hundreds of times beyond the needs of world energy consumption in 2000.
Advances in technologies are reducing manufacturing costs and increasing system efficiencies, thereby reducing the cost of energy from renewable resources.Negative environmental and health impacts of renewable energy use are much fewer than those of fossil fuels and nuclear power.Many renewable energy technologies can produce energy at the point of use, allowing homeowners, businesses, and industry to produce their own power.There is strong support for renewable energy from people around the world.Many governments have programs that support renewable energy use to limit the emission of greenhouse gases and thereby reduce the threat of global warming.As fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas become scarce, they will become more expensive. Some experts believe that demand for oil will exceed production capability within the next twenty years.Using energy conservatively and efficiently, no matter how it is produced or where it comes from, is the most economical way to consume energy. Simply turning off lights and computers when they are not in use can save an individual household or business money and reduce the environmental impact associated with producing electricity.
WATERPOWER
Waterpower is the product of falling water acting by impact, weight, or reaction on a wheel. For many centuries the simpler forms of waterwheels were made of wood and varied in diameter and breadth of rim, with flat or concave paddles or hollow troughs, known as buckets, attached around the circumference. Power came directly from water flow past a streamside (or boat-affixed) paddlewheel with paddles that dipped into the stream current. The noria, probably the most ancient of waterwheels and still widely used throughout the world, was of this type; it raised water from the powering stream by means of small vessels attached around the circumference.
A far more common and useful method of generating waterpower was to locate the wheel near an abrupt descent in the streambed(that is, a waterfall). By raising a simple dam of earth, rocks, or timber across the stream above the waterfall, the amount of descent was increased. The water was diverted into a ditch called a race and conveyed to the waterwheel, located beside or beneath the mill at a convenient site downstream. With a descent of several feet, a modest wheel in a small brook might deliver as much as two to three horsepower, sufficient to drive a small gristmill, sawmill, or fulling mill.The watermills that served the frontier settlers of eighteenth-and nineteenth-century America greatly eased the more arduous tasks. The most common watermill on the American frontier was the gristmill, by which grain was reduced between millstones to the meal that was the basis of the settlers' diet. Later, the sawmill made it possible to replace log cabins with wood-frame dwellings.Before the development of steam-driven machinery early in the nineteenth century, the alternative to the water-powered mill was the windmill. But the numerous and extensive river systems of the United States, particularly along the Atlantic coast, provided a wealth of waterpower. Waterpower fueled the early industrialization of the eastern seaboard. By 1840 there were well over fifty thousand gristmills and sawmills in use, half of them in the Middle Atlantic states and New England.Waterpower complexes, of which the largest were found on the Merrimack and Connecticut Rivers in New England, provided the power base of some of the country's largest industrial centers, with the mills at Lowell, Massachusetts, driven by the powerful Pawtucket Falls, as the prototype and exemplar. These great waterpower complexes, dating from the 1820s, used great wooden wheels fifteen or more feet in diameter and of equal or greater width. These so-called breast-wheels were quite similar to the paddlewheels of river steamboats, except for the wooden troughs that replaced the flat paddles. The invention of the turbine marked an advance in efficiency, economy, and rotating speeds. Developed in Europe, particularly by the French engineer Benoit Fourneyron (1827), the turbine was improved in the United States, notably at Lowell, where Uriah A. Boyden, in 1844, and James B. Francis, in 1851, developed the most common type of modem water turbine. The other significant type of water turbine, the "impulse" turbine, for use in small streams that fall very steeply, was also developed in the United States.After 1860 the rapid extension of the railway network doomed the widely distributed industries located along streams in small towns. As the advantages of large urban centers became apparent—increased labor supply; financial, commercial, and supply services; and transportation facilities—the centralization of manufacturing industries in large cities gathered momentum. Since few large cities possessed appreciable waterpower, their growth depended on steam power and access to coal, which was widely available through rail and water transport. Marked advances in the efficiency of steam engines and boilers in the late nineteenth century negated the cost advantage long enjoyed by waterpower. By 1870 steam power passed waterpower capacity in manufacturing nationwide, and in succeeding decades it left waterpower far behind.The success of the Niagara hydroelectric power project of the early 1890s signaled the beginning of a new age in the history of waterpower. Based on the electrical transmission of energy, hydroelectric power bore little significant relation to the traditional, direct-drive waterpower in which each establishment, small or large, had its own power plant, with most establishments leasing the use of the water by which its wheels were driven. After 1900 hydroelectric power was produced in plants of enormous capacity and distributed over long distances by high-tension power lines.
Solar Energy
In a broad sense, most energy that individuals use is some form of solar energy. Other renewable energy sources (such as wind, hydropower, and wood) indirectly harness solar energy by using the atmosphere, oceans, and forests as solar collectors. Even exhaustible fossil fuels (oil, coal, and natural gas) are solar energy that was originally captured by plants and concentrated by geological processes into forms with high energy densities per unit of weight and volume.In more common usage, solar energy refers to the two primary ways in which people harness and directly use solar energy using manufactured collectors: heating, and generating electricity. 
Space and water heating systems for buildings can be either passive or active. Both approaches use glass to trap heat, as in a greenhouse. Passive design uses no moving parts or fluids; rather, it involves incorporating features into the siting and design of a building to take advantage of the natural solar radiation available. Such features include large windows facing south, heat-absorbent material such as brick or tile in floors and walls, and orienting a building on its site so as to maximize sun exposure.Active heating systems use water or another liquid piped through collector units. The most common type of collector is a roof-mounted flat-plate design, consisting of an insulated glass-covered box painted black to maximize heat absorption. Water circulates in a loop between the collectors, where it is heated, and a tank, where it is stored until needed for either domestic uses or space heating.There are two technologies for converting solar energy to electricity. Solar thermal-electric power plants (also called concentrating-solar-power, or CSP, power plants) use mirrors to gather solar radiation and focus it on a small area to produce high temperatures. The concentrating collectors may be parabolic troughs or dishes, or a system of mirrors that are spread over a wide area and that focus sunlight on a receiver at the top of a tower in what is called a power tower or central receiver system. A fluid circulates through a receiver unit at the parabola’s focal point, where it is boiled. The resulting steam drives a generator as in a conventional power plant. Unlike solar-heating systems, which are installed at the point of energy consumption, CSP plants are typically large, central-station generating facilities.The other solar-electric technology is photovoltaic cells. Photovoltaic cells are made of a semiconducting material, such as silicon, that releases electrons when struck by light. Cells are typically combined into modules, which in turn are assembled into larger arrays. Arrays can be sized for residential, industrial, or electric-utility use. The most commonly used material is crystalline silicon, but research since the 1970s has produced advances in such newer designs as thin-film cells using noncrystalline (amorphous) silicon, cadmium telluride, and other materials.Interest in solar energy was stimulated in the 1970s by high oil prices and has been further stimulated by government policies, such as tax credits. Enthusiasm diminished in the 1980s and 1990s as the prices of oil and natural gas fell and many government subsidies lapsed. After the late 1990s interest was renewed by rising energy prices, but the use of solar energy remains limited. In Renewable Energy (2002), the International Energy Agency estimates that in the year 2000, solar heating made up 0.3 percent of world energy consumption and photovoltaic cells contributed less than 0.05 percent.The major impediment to solar energy is cost. Though solar radiation is abundant and nonpolluting, the equipment required to gather and utilize it is expensive. Solar heating systems have found some commercial adoption in sunny locations for certain applications, especially for heating swimming pools. CSP technologies, though technologically proven, are not yet competitive with other sources of electricity. Perhaps the most promising technology is photovoltaics. By 2002, photovoltaic costs had fallen to about 20 to 30 percent of their 1980 levels. They have become cost-effective in some specialized applications, particularly in remote locations far from existing power lines. From 1992 to 2003, installed photovoltaic capacity worldwide grew by about 30 percent annually.Economic theory predicts that as exhaustible energy resources are depleted, their prices will tend to rise, making renewable sources more attractive over time. The longrun prospects for solar energy will depend on how its cost compares with other energy sources.
The nuclear power plant 
A nuclear power plant is a system in which energy released by fission reactions is captured and used for the generation of electricity. Every such plant contains four fundamental elements: the reactor, the coolant system, the electrical power generating unit, and the safety system. 
The source of energy in a nuclear reactor is a fission reaction in which neutrons collide with nuclei of uranium-235 or plutonium-239 (the fuel), causing them to split apart. The products of any fission reaction include not only huge amounts of energy, but also waste products, known as fission products, and additional neutrons. A constant and reliable flow of neutrons is ensured in the reactor by means of a moderator, which slows down the speed of neutrons, and control rods, which control the number of neutrons available in the reactor and, hence, the rate at which fission can occur. 
Energy produced in the reactor is carried away by means of a coolant—a fluid such as water, or liquid sodium, or carbon dioxide gas. The fluid absorbs heat from the reactor and then begins to boil itself or to cause water in a secondary system to boil. Steam produced in either of these ways is then piped into the electrical generating unit, where it turns the blades of a turbine. The turbine, in turn, powers a generator that produces electrical energy. 
Safety systems. The high cost of constructing a modern nuclear power plant reflects in part the enormous range of safety features needed to protect against various possible mishaps. Some of those features are incorporated into the reactor core itself. For example, all of the fuel in a reactor is sealed in a protective coating made of a zirconium alloy. The protective coating, called a cladding, helps retain heat and radioactivity within the fuel, preventing it from escaping into the power plant itself.Every nuclear plant is also required to have an elaborate safety system to protect against the most serious potential problem of all: the loss of coolant. If such an accident were to occur, the reactor core might well melt down, releasing radioactive materials to the rest of the plant and, perhaps, to the outside environment. To prevent such an accident from happening, the pipes carrying the coolant are required to be very thick and strong. In addition, backup supplies of the coolant must be available to replace losses in case of a leak.On another level, the whole plant itself is required to be encased within a dome-shaped containment structure. The containment structure is designed to prevent the release of radioactive materials in case of an accident within the reactor core.Another safety feature is a system of high-efficiency filters through which all air leaving the building must pass. These filters are designed to trap microscopic particles of radioactive materials that might otherwise be released to the atmosphere. Additional specialized devices and systems have been developed for dealing with other kinds of accidents in various parts of the power plant.Types of nuclear power plants. Nuclear power plants differ from each other primarily in the methods they use for transferring heat produced in the reactor to the electricity-generating unit. Perhaps the simplest design of all is the boiling water reactor (BWR) plant. In a BWR plant, coolant water surrounding the reactor is allowed to boil and form steam. That steam is then piped directly to turbines, which spin and drive the electrical generator. A very different type of plant is one that was popular in Great Britain for many years—one that used carbon dioxide as a coolant. In this type of plant, carbon dioxide gas passes through the reactor core, absorbs heat produced by fission reactions, and is piped into a secondary system. There the heated carbon dioxide gas gives up its energy to water, which begins to boil and change to steam. That steam is then used to power the turbine and generator.Safety concerns. In spite of all the systems developed by nuclear engineers, the general public has long had serious concerns about the use of such plants as sources of electrical power. Those concerns vary considerably from nation to nation. In France, for example, more than half of all that country's electrical power now comes from nuclear power plants. By contrast, the initial enthusiasm for nuclear power in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s soon faded, and no new nuclear power plant has been constructed in this country since the mid-1980s. Currently, 104 commercial nuclear power reactors in 31 states generate about 22 percent of the total electricity produced in the country.One concern about nuclear power plants, of course, is the memory of the world's first exposure to nuclear power: the atomic bomb blasts. Many people fear that a nuclear power plant may go out of control and explode like a nuclear weapon. Most experts insist that such an event is impossible. But a few major disasters continue to remind the public about the worst dangers associated with nuclear power plants. By far the most serious of those disasters was the explosion that occurred at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant near Kiev in Ukraine in 1986.On April 16 of that year, one of the four power-generating units in the Chernobyl complex exploded, blowing the top off the containment building. Hundreds of thousands of nearby residents were exposed to deadly or damaging levels of radiation and were removed from the area. Radioactive clouds released by the explosion were detected as far away as western Europe. More than a decade later, the remains of the Chernobyl reactor were still far too radioactive for anyone to spend more than a few minutes in the area.Critics also worry about the amount of radioactivity released by nuclear power plants on a day-to-day basis. This concern is probably of less importance than is the possibility of a major disaster. Studies have shown that nuclear power plants are so well shielded that the amount of radiation to which nearby residents are exposed under normal circumstances is no more than that of a person living many miles away.
In any case, safety concerns in the United States have been serious enough essentially to bring the construction of new plants to a halt. By the end of the twentieth century, licensing procedures were so complex and so expensive that few industries were interested in working their way through the bureaucratic maze to construct new plants.Nuclear waste management. Perhaps the single most troubling issue for the nuclear power industry is waste management. After a period of time, the fuel rods in a reactor are no longer able to sustain a chain reaction and must be removed. These rods are still highly radioactive, however, and present a serious threat to human life and the environment. Techniques must be developed for the destruction and/or storage of these wastes.Nuclear wastes can be classified into two general categories: low-level wastes and high-level wastes. The former consist of materials that release a relatively modest level of radiation and/or that will soon decay to a level where they no longer present a threat to humans and the environment. Storing these materials in underground or underwater reservoirs for a few years is usually satisfactory.High-level wastes are a different matter. The materials that make up these wastes are intensely radioactive and are likely to remain so for thousands of years. Short-term methods of storage are unsatisfactory because containers would leak and break open long before the wastes were safe.For more than two decades, the U.S. government has been attempting to develop a plan for the storage of high-level nuclear wastes. At one time, the plan was to bury the wastes in a salt mine near Lyons, Kansas. Objections from residents of the area and other concerned citizens caused that plan to be shelved. More recently, the government decided to construct a huge crypt in the middle of Yucca Mountain in Nevada for the burial of high-level wastes. Again, complaints by residents of Nevada and other citizens have delayed putting that plan into operation. The government insists, however, that Yucca Mountain will eventually become the long-term storage site for the nation's high-level radioactive wastes. Until then, those wastes are in "temporary" storage at nuclear power sites throughout the United States.
History
The first nuclear reactor was built during World War II (1939–45) as part of the Manhattan Project to build an atomic bomb. The reactor was constructed under the direction of Enrico Fermi in a large room beneath the squash courts at the University of Chicago. It was built as the first concrete test of existing theories of nuclear fission.Until December 2, 1942, when the reactor was first put into operation, scientists had relied entirely on mathematical calculations to determine the effectiveness of nuclear fission as an energy source. It goes without saying that the scientists who constructed the first reactor were taking an extraordinary chance.
That first reactor consisted of alternating layers of uranium and uranium oxide with graphite as a moderator. Cadmium control rods were used to control the concentration of neutrons in the reactor. Since the various parts of the reactor were constructed by piling materials on top of each other, the unit was at first known as an atomic pile. The moment at which Fermi directed the control rods to be withdrawn occurred at 3:45 p.m. on December 2, 1945. That date can legitimately be regarded as the beginning of the age of controlled nuclear power in human history. 
Nuclear fusion power 
Many scientists believe that the ultimate solution to the world's energy problems may be in the harnessing of nuclear fusion power. A fusion reaction is one in which two small nuclei combine with each other to form one larger nucleus. For example, two hydrogen nuclei may combine with each other to form the nucleus of an atom known as deuterium, or heavy hydrogen.The world was introduced to the concept of fusion reactions in the 1950s, when the Soviet Union and the United States exploded the first fusion (hydrogen) bombs. The energy released in the explosion of each such bomb was more than 1,000 times greater than the energy released in the explosion of a single fission bomb.As with fission, scientists and nonscientists alike expressed hope that fusion reactions could someday be harnessed as a source of energy for everyday needs. This line of research has been much less successful, however, than research on fission power plants. In essence, the problem has been to find a way of containing the very high temperatures produced (a few million degrees Celsius) when fusion occurs. Optimistic reports of progress on a fusion power plant appear in the press from time to time, but some authorities now doubt that fusion power will ever be an economic reality.