OLYMPIC GAMES
In 1896 the first modern Olympic Games were held in Athens, the site of the original games. Subsequent Olympic Games were hosted by Paris in 1900, Saint Louis in 1904, and London in 1908. These Olympic Games were held in conjunction with World's Fairs, events that often overshadowed the athletic contests. Meeting in Berlin in 1909, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) selected Stockholm, Sweden, as the site of the fifth Olympic Games. "Of all the countries in the world," remarked Baron Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympic movement and secretary-general of the IOC, "Sweden is at the moment best qualified to host a great Olympic Games." Although Stockholm's award was largely because of a strong campaign by Sweden's longtime IOC representative, Col. Victor Balak, who would become the chairman of the Swedish Olympic Organizing Committee, Germany ensured the selection of the Swedish capital by withdrawing Berlin as a candidate for the host city. In order to hold the Olympic Games in Stockholm, however, the IOC dropped boxing from its schedule of events, because Sweden prohibited the sport
The Swedish Success
The Games of the fifth Olympiad, according to historian John Lucas, were "the best organized and most pacific international games since the original Athens' celebration." Held from 5 May to 22 July, the Stockholm Olympics were the largest since the revival of the Games in 1896, with 2,490 athletes from twenty-eight nations participating. Sweden, the host nation, finished as the unofficial team champion with sixty-five medals—twenty-four gold, twenty-four silver, and seventeen bronze. The United States finished second to the Swedes, garnering sixty-one medals, of which twenty-three were gold, nineteen silver, and nineteen bronze. Great Britain, the team champion of the 1908 Olympic Games held in London, was third with forty-one medals—ten gold, fifteen silver, and sixteen bronze. Scandinavian athletes, on the whole, performed well in the 1912 games. Swedish athletes, who won medals in nearly all sports, were particularly strong in the triple jump, cross-country, equestrian, modern pentathlon, shooting, diving, Greco-Roman wrestling, and yachting. Finnish runners initiated their pre-World War II dominance in long distance events.
American Triumphs
As in previous Olympic Games, American athletes dominated track and field. Ralph Craig of the University of Michigan won both the 100 meters, leading an American medal sweep, and the 200 meters. Syracuse University's Charles Reidpath won the 400 meters in an Olympic record of 48.2 seconds. James Meredith, a prep-school runner from Pennsylvania, captured the 800 meters in a world record of 1:51.9, narrowly defeating countrymen Melvin Sheppard and Ira Davenport by a hundredth of a second. Louis Tewanima, a Hopi Indian, finished second to Finland's Johannes Kolehmainen in the 10,000 meters. Jim Thorpe, a Native American of Sac and Fox descent, won the decathlon and pentathlon events. Americans swept the medals in the 110-meter high hurdles, pole vault, and shot put. Hawaiian swimmer Duke Kahanamoku won the 100-meter freestyle, his first of five Olympic medals spread over four Olympic Games. Americans performed surprisingly well in shooting, winning four gold medals, three silver, and one bronze. In the three-day equestrian team event, Americans won the bronze medal. American cyclists also won bronze in the individual and team road races.
Furor over Women's Aquatics
The IOC expanded women's sports to include swimming and diving at the 1912 games. Many in the United States and Australia opposed this expansion of women's events on the Olympic schedule. James E. Sullivan, the head of the AAU in the United States, opposed women's sports altogether, and did not permit American female swimmers and divers to compete in Stockholm. Australian feminist Rose Scott opposed female participation in swimming and diving because, as historian Allen Guttmann put it, she "feared that the presence of shapely young women in swimsuits might attract more voyeurs than sports spectators." Scott's protests aside, Australian women went to Stockholm and returned with the gold and silver medals in the 100-meter freestyle. Sarah Durack, the gold medalist, won the event in a world record of 1:22.2. In the 4-by-100-meter freestyle relay the British won in a world record of 5:52.8. Greta Johansson and Lisa Regnell, both of Sweden, dueled in platform diving, with Johansson gaining the gold and Regnell the silver. Despite the pre-Olympic furor over the women's swimming and diving events, Everett C. Brown, an AAU associate of Sullivan, viewed and approved of the new events, noting that any criticism of them must "have been brought about by foul minds."
Berlin Plans for the 1916 Games
In 1909, when the IOC met in Berlin and decided upon Stockholm as the site for the 1912 Olympic Games, it also told the German Olympic Committee to "begin serious planning for the 1916 Olympic celebration." This announcement inspired the Germans to make Berlin the ultimate site for the Olympic Games. Since 1896, when the German Olympic Committee had returned from the first modern Olympic Games in Athens, they had campaigned vigorously to host the event in Berlin. Immediately upon learning that the German capital would most likely be the site for the Games of the sixth Olympiad, the Berliners started construction of a thirty-four-thousand-seat stadium, complete with a four-hundred-meter running track and six-hundred-meter cycling track, as well as a one-hundred-meter swimming pool with a gallery for four thousand spectators. In 1911 the IOC announced officially that Berlin would host the 1916 Olympic Games, but national elation turned into disappointment after German athletes failed to perform well in the 1912 Olympic Games. In response, the Germans visited the United States to study military and collegiate athletic training systems. They hired Alvin C. Kraenzlein, a German American who coached track at the University of Michigan and an Olympic gold medalist from 1900, to prepare German Olympians. Once in Germany, Kraenzlein told The New York Times in 1913 that German "life could only benefit from the healthy enthusiasm and rivalry found in athletic competition and Olympic sports."
The Games Canceled by war
In addition to unfurling the five-ringed flag that has come to symbolize the Olympic Games, the IOC finalized the program for the 1916 Olympic Games at the 1914 IOC convention. After the convention Robert Thompson, the president of the American Olympic Committee, remarked that "the Berlin Games would be the greatest ever held," because of the thoroughness of the Germans' organization and preparation. Less than a month after Thompson made that remark, war broke out in Europe. Germany, allied with Austria-Hungary, declared war on Russia and France. Coubertin believed that the Germans, as the host nation for the 1916 Olympic Games, would sue for a peaceful end to the war, but Germany soon invaded Belgium, and Great Britain entered the war against the Central Powers, Germany and Austria-Hungary. Anticipating a quick end to the conflict, the German Olympic Committee continued to prepare for the Games, but other national Olympic Committees urged Coubertin to change the venue for the Games. In a letter to The New York Times in j 1915 Coubertin stated his position: "The Sixth Olympic Games remain and will remain credited to Berlin, but it is possible that they will not be held." With European civilization on the brink of destruction during the summer of 1916, Berlin's Olympic Games were canceled.The Olympic Games are an international sporting event held quadrennially in different venues. The date of inception remains a point of conjecture among historians, but it is generally accepted that the Olympic Games found their genesis in Olympia, Greece, in 776 BCE and survived in attenuated form until 393 BCE. Inspired by the ancient Greek festival, the modern Olympic Games were revived in 1896 by Baron Pierre de Coubertin, a French nobleman who envisaged that the Games would foster a religion of patriotism by directing the new power of national identity into constructive and peaceful channels. Initially, only amateur athletes were permitted to compete in the Olympics; professional athletes were not allowed to compete until the 1970s when the amateurism requirements were extracted from the Olympic Charter. The revival of the Olympic Games was held in Athens, Greece. The Games attracted a relatively small competitive field, with about 240 athletes competing in 43 events.In the early years of the twentieth century, the International Olympic Committee encountered an array of difficulties with the hosting of the Games. The subsequent two celebrations that followed the Athens Games failed to command popular support, partly because they were crossed with, and effectively eclipsed by, the World’s Fair Exhibitions in Paris (1900) and Saint Louis (1904). The 1908 Games, though originally awarded to Rome, were held in London. The majority of the competing countries selected national teams to participate in the London Games, and the athletes were paraded by nation at the opening ceremony. The Olympic Games had institutionalized the “nation” in international athletics. After the 1912 Olympic Games, held in Stockholm, the Olympic movement entered a period of upheaval. De Coubertin may have seen the Olympics as an agent of international peace in a world moving inexorably toward war, but the ideal of the Olympics as an event that could prevent war proved ill-founded. The Games scheduled for Berlin in 1916 were abandoned because of World War I, and two other Olympiads passed without Games in 1940 and 1944 as a result of World War II.In the aftermath of World War I, the 1920 Games were awarded to Antwerp as a mark of respect for the Belgian people after the anguish that had been inflicted on them during the war. The 1920 opening ceremony was notable for the introduction of the Olympic flag, the release of doves as a symbol of peace, and the presentation of the athletes’ oath. The introduction of the flag, representing the unity of the five continents, and the symbolic release of doves also reflected the idyllic vision of the Olympic movement as standing for international peace and unity.However, it was also in the interwar period that Olympic sport became symbolic of national struggle, with participants as representatives of their national groups. Throughout the twentieth century, John MacAloon argues, “a nascent athletic nationalism was already undermining the Olympic ideal” (1981, pp. 258–259). A notable instance of this was Adolf Hitler’s use of the 1936 Olympic Games to enhance his control over the German populace and legitimize Nazi culture. The opening ceremony designed for those games was a shrewdly propagandistic and brilliantly conceived charade that reinforced and mobilized the hysterical patriotism of the German masses. The Berlin Games have also become closely associated in the popular imagination with the African American athlete Jesse Owens. Against a background of Nazi efforts to manipulate the Games to demonstrate the racial and athletic superiority of the Aryan race, Owens won four gold medals at the first Olympic Games to be broadcast on a form of television. The Berlin Games demonstrated how the hosting of the Olympic Games could be manipulated to provide a benign and uncritical backdrop for the parade of national identity.Another political incident involving African American athletes occurred at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City. Two African American track-and-field athletes, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, bowed their heads and raised a black-gloved power salute on the victory podium during the playing of “The Star-Spangled Banner.” USA Olympics officials asserted that the athletes should not have used the Games as a platform to air their political grievances, and the two athletes were immediately suspended from the U.S. team and banned from the Olympic Village. Politics was also to cast its shadow over the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, West Germany, when members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken hostage by the Palestinian terrorist organization Black September. The terrorists killed eleven Israeli athletes and one German police officer in an event that is conventionally referred to as the Munich Massacre.The 1980 Olympics in Moscow were arguably the most political in the history of the Games and reflected the extremes of nationalism that had emerged as a result of the renewed cold war struggle. In 1980 the United States and sixty-four other Western nations refused to compete at the Moscow Olympics that year because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The boycott reduced the number of nations participating to only eighty, including only sixteen Western nations—the lowest number of nations to compete since 1956. The Soviet Union and fourteen Eastern bloc countries (Romania was the exception) retaliated by boycotting the Los Angeles Olympics in 1984.In the Olympic arena, encircled by flags of various nations, the political symbolism of sport is most evident. Young nations make use of the nationalist symbolism of sport to gain recognition on the world stage; established nations do so to demonstrate their strength and prowess. The media make use of sport to construct a “battle” among nations, giving individuals a public spectacle at which they can cheer on their compatriots. The central role of the Olympics as a forum where new nations can gain acceptance is also clear from the number of nations taking part. In Antwerp in 1920, twenty-nine nations competed; by the Athens Olympics of 2004, that number had risen spectacularly to 201. The importance of the Olympic Games to cultural unity and national identity lies not only within the event as staged but in the sporting occasion as an international spectacle. Beyond the demonstration of physical strength and skill, Olympic sport as collective ritual, highlighting concepts of leadership and heroism, has become part of the language of nationalism.
SWIMMING
The origins of swimming are lost in the murk of prehistory, but humans probably developed the skill after watching animals "dog paddle." Swimmers appear in artwork on Egyptian tombs, in Assyrian stone carvings, in Hittite and Minoan drawings, and in Toltec murals. Ancient gladiators swam while training, and Plato believed that a man who could not swim was uneducated. Contemporaries reported that both Julius Caesar and Charlemagne were strong swimmers.The first swimming races of which there is a record were held in Japan in 36 b.c., but England was the first modern society to develop swimming as a competitive sport. In the nineteenth century, the British competed in the breaststroke and the sidestroke, both modifications of the "dog paddle." They were generally more interested in endurance than speed, and viewed swimming the English Channel as the supreme test.While Europeans employed the breaststroke and side-stroke, natives of the Americas, West Africa, and some Pacific Islands used variations of the crawl. Europeans got their first glimpse of this new stroke in 1844, when a group of American Indians was invited to London to compete. Flying Gull bested Tobacco by swimming 130 feet in an unheard-of 30 seconds. One observer noted that the Indians "thrashed the water violently" and compared their arm action to the "sails of a windmill." The British were impressed with the natives' speed, but they considered their style uncivilized.

The overhand stroke was finally introduced to Britain in the 1870s by J. Arthur Trudgen, who noticed indigenous people using the technique during a trip to South America. Upon his return, he began teaching this approach to others. As British swimmers began combining the Trudgen overhand with the breaststroke frog kick, the focus of competition began to shift from distance to speed.

Trudgen had failed to notice the natives' use of the flutter kick, but this was not lost on another British swimmer, Frederick Cavill. In 1878, Cavill immigrated to Australia, where he taught swimming and built pools. During a trip to the Solomon Islands near the turn of the century, Cavill closely watched Pacific Islanders swimming. Noting the way they combined the overhand stroke with kicking action, he taught this new method to his six sons and other British émigrés. His sons, in turn, carried the "Australian crawl" back to England and the United States. The American swimmer Charles Daniels improved on the "Australian crawl" by timing his kick to his armstroke. Using the "American crawl," Daniels won the United States's first Olympic gold medal in 1904.Although the Greeks did not include swimming in the ancient Olympics, a freestyle competition was part of the first modern games held in 1896. (Freestyle meant that any stroke was allowed.) In 1900, the backstroke was added, as well as three unusual swimming events: an obstacle course, a test of underwater swimming, and a 4,000-meter event. Only the backstroke competition was retained. By 1904, the crawl was becoming the dominant
freestyle stroke, so the breaststroke was made a separate event.The first American swimmer to achieve national fame was Duke Kahanamoku, a native Hawaiian who won three gold medals and two silvers in the 1912, 1920, and 1924 Olympics. Kahanamoku used six flutter kicks for each cycle of his arms, a technique that is now considered the classic freestyle form. In 1924, the twenty-year-old Johnny Weissmuller beat Kahanamoku, achieving international celebrity. In a decade of racing, Weissmuller set twenty-four world swimming records, won five Olympic gold medals, and never lost a race of between 50 yards and a half-mile. Weissmuller achieved even greater fame, however, when he went on to Hollywood to play Tarzan on the silver screen.Women were excluded from Olympic swimming until 1912 because they were considered too frail to engage in competitive sports. In the 1910s, however, the newly formed Women's Swimming Association of New York gave women an opportunity to train for competition. Gertrude Ederle, the daughter of a delicatessen owner, began setting world records in distances of between 100 and 800 meters. Wanting to win fame for her swimming club, in 1926 she became the first woman to swim the English Channel. The nineteen-year-old's time of 14 hours and 31 minutes broke the existing men's record, and Ederle returned home to a ticker-tape parade. The first American woman to win an Olympic swimming title was Ethelda Bleibtrey, who captured three gold medals in 1920.The early twentieth century also saw a boom in leisure swimming. Americans had been going to the beach for seaside recreation ever since railroads made public beaches more accessible in the late nineteenth century. The first municipal pool in the United States was built in Brookline, Massachusetts, in 1887, and by the 1920s many cities and some wealthy homeowners had installed pools. Leisure swimming had health as well as social benefits; President Franklin D. Roosevelt swam regularly to strengthen legs weakened by paralysis, while President John F. Kennedy swam to strengthen his back muscles.Beginning in the 1930s, women's swimsuits became increasingly streamlined and revealing. (Fabric rationing during World War II [1939–1945] led to the introduction of the two-piece bathing suit, and the "bikini"—named for a U.S. nuclear testing site in the South Pacific—debuted in 1946.) Pin-up girls and starlets appeared in bathing attire, and in 1944 swimming champion Esther Williams made a splash in the film Bathing Beauty. Williams's appearance in a string of Hollywood swimming movies in the 1940s and 1950s helped popularize synchronized swimming.Hollywood was not alone in turning a camera on swimmers. In 1934, Iowa University coach Dave Armbruster first filmed swimmers in order to study their strokes. To speed his breaststrokers, Armbruster developed a double overarm recovery known as the "butterfly." An Iowa swimmer, Jack Seig, paired this with a "dolphin kick," in which his body undulated from the hips to the toes. The butterfly was so exhausting that it was initially considered a novelty, but swimmers using the overhand stroke began dominating breaststroke races. In 1953, the butterfly was finally recognized as a separate competitive stroke.The final years of the twentieth century were golden for American swimmers. Mark Spitz, a butterfly and free-style racer, garnered seven gold medals and seven world records in the 1972 Munich Olympics, the most ever in a single Olympiad. In 1992, freestyler Matt Biondi matched Spitz's career record of 11 Olympic medals (The only other Olympian to win 11 medals was shooter Carl Osburn). In the 1980s, Tracy Caulkins became the only American swimmer ever to hold U.S. records in every stroke; she won three gold medals at the Olympics in 1984. Competing in the 1992, 1996, and 2000 Games, Jenny Thompson won ten butterfly and freestyle medals, including eight golds, the most ever captured by a woman.
ICE SKATING
A sport brought to North America from Europe in the 1740s, takes three basic forms. Figure skating, solo or in pairs, includes jumps and spins with varying degrees of difficulty, combined with movement and dance. Speed skating (and short-track speed skating) is racing on ice. Ice hockey is a team sport played on ice. In the mid-nineteenth century, skates were made of steel with straps and clamps to fasten them to shoes. Later in the century, the blade with the permanently attached shoe was developed by the American ballet dancer and vanguard figure skater Jackson Haines, who also introduced the elements of dance and music into the previously rigid form of figure skating.British soldiers stationed in Canada introduced a game called "shinty," which combined field hockey with ice skates. The game was originally played with a ball, but in the 1860s a puck was introduced. Regulations and associations quickly developed to govern the popular and reckless sport, and in 1892 the Canadian governor general, Frederick Arthur, Lord Stanley of Preston, donated a cup to be given to the top Canadian team after an annual playoff. The Stanley Cup is still the object the National Hockey League (NHL) competes for in its championship games. Professional women's hockey debuted in the late 1990s.The first recorded speed-skating race in England was in the Fens during 1814. World championships for speed skating (men only) began in the 1890s. In 1892, the world governing body of both speed and figure skating—The International Skating Union (ISU)—was founded. Six years later, the first ISU-sanctioned event was held. In 1914, pioneer figure skater George H. Browne organized the first International Figure Skating Championships of America under the sponsorship of the ISU of America. In 1921, the United States Figure Skating Association (USFSA) was formed to govern the sport and promote its national growth.As an Olympic sport, figure skating (considered an indoor sport) debuted in the 1908 Olympic Summer Games in London, with competitions held for men, women, and pairs. It became a winter sport at the first-ever 1924 Winter Games in Chamonix, France. Originally, figure skating was executed in a stiff, formal style. Compulsory movements consisted of curves and turns, in or against the direction of movement, and executed to form several circle forms in a row. Although music, more fluid movements, pirouettes, spins, and ever-increasing athleticism were continually added to the performance roster, compulsory figures remained a part of Olympic competition until 1991. Ice hockey was included in the summer Olympics in 1920 and in the inaugural winter games of 1924, where men's speed skating was also an event. Women's speed-skating championships were first held in 1936 and included in the Olympics in 1960. Ice dancing, a figureskating discipline, became an Olympic event in 1976 and short-track speed skating in 1992.American skaters have won more Olympic medals to date—forty by 2002—than competitors from any other country. The first American Olympic skating gold medal winner was Charles Jewtraw, who won the 500-meter speed-skating event in 1924. That same year, Beatrix Loughran took the silver medal for women's figure skating. The winning tradition continued through the turn of the twenty-first century, with Tara Lipinski winning the gold in 1998, and Sarah Hughes winning the gold in 2002. During the last decades of the twentieth centuries, many Olympic medallists such as Dorothy Hamill, Peggy Fleming, and Scott Hamilton enjoyed lasting popularity, and figure skating competitions became highly watched events.
Gymnastics
Gymnastics is the practice of athletic exercises for the development of the body, especially those exercises performed with apparatus such as rings, pommel horse, bars, and balance beam. Although gymnastics was likely practised in ancient Egyptian and Chinese cultures, its roots for Western culture lie in ancient Greece, hence the derivation from the Greek word gymnazein, which literally means ‘to train naked’ (gymnos: naked). The early Greeks practised gymnastics in preparation for war, as jumping, running, discus throwing, wrestling, and boxing helped produce the strong, supple muscles necessary for hand-to-hand combat. Because military training was necessary for the production of Greek citizens, and because the Greeks viewed the training both of the body and the mind as inextricably linked, gymnastics became a central component of ancient education. Gymnasia, the buildings with open-air courts where such training took place, evolved into schools where youths learned gymnastics, rhetoric, music, and mathematics. Gymnastics also provided a way to train for the athletic festivals around Greece, the most famous of which was the Olympic Games, held every four years from 776 bce until 393 ce.With the end of the Olympic Games, Greek-style gymnastics training declined, not to be revived until the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in Western Europe. With this revival came a concomitant revival of the corporeal values associated with gymnastics: upper body strength, musculature, elasticity, litheness, flexibility, poise, and equilibrium. Underpinning the re-emergence of gymnastic training is the same assumption held by the Greeks, that a healthy body and a healthy mind are intimately connected.In the mid 1800s Friedrich Jahn did much to re-introduce gymnastics into German education and became known as the ‘father of gymnastics’. Jahn introduced the horizontal bar, parallel bars, side horse with pommels, balance beam, ladder, and vaulting bucks. His gymnastics program was promoted in Turner societies, clubs established to develop self discipline and physical strength in the name of national unity. In Sweden, Pehr Henrik Ling followed closely behind Jahn, systematizing Swedish pedagogic gymnastics with a strong emphasis on the medical benefits.In the early nineteenth century, educators in the US imported German and Swedish gymnastics training programs. With the American integration of gymnastics into the general education curriculum, its connections to nationalism and military training re-emerged stronger than ever. By the early twentieth century, the armed services published drill manuals featuring all manner of gymnastic exercises, drills which, according to the US Army Manual of Physical Drill (1910), provided proper instruction for ‘a body of young and active men’ and were thus ‘all important’. The US Navy's Gymnastics and Tumbling, published in 1944, asserts that ‘Gymnastics and tumbling contribute in large measure to the demands of a democracy at war.’ Nonetheless, as military activity moved away from hand-to-hand combat and toward fighter planes and contemporary computer-controlled weapons, gymnastics training as the mind/body connection, so important for the Greek, German, and Swedish educational traditions, began to lose force. As a result, physical and intellectual training in schools are now almost completely separate; although in Germany the term ‘gymnasium’ still persists as the term for a place of secondary education, the gymnasium is more commonly cordoned off for physical training, while the privileged intellectual education takes place in traditional classrooms. The mind/body split is more pervasive than ever.The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the powerful emergence of a strand of gymnastics, similar in form to gymnastic training for educational and military purposes, but practised for different ends. The first Modern Olympic games in 1896 featured competitive gymnastic events for men, which have been included in every Olympics since. Men's gymnastics events are scored on an individual and team basis, and presently include the floor exercise, horizontal bar, parallel bars, rings, side horse (also called pommel horse), vaulting, and combined exercises (the all-around), which combines the scores of the other six events. Combined exercises for women were first held in 1928, and the 1952 Olympics featured the first full regime of events for women. Women's gymnastic events include balance beam, uneven parallel bars, combined exercises, floor exercises, vaulting, and rhythmic sportive gymnastics. Olga Korbut, Nadia Comaneci, and Mary Lou Retton have helped popularize women's competitive gymnastics, making it one of the most watched Olympic events as they performed difficult manœuvres on some of the very apparatus developed for bodily training by Friedrich Jahn in the eighteenth century.
As the National Basketball Association (NBA) staggered toward the close of the 1970s, attendance was down in almost every market and television ratings were declining. The public was disenchanted with players' bouts with alcohol and drug abuse and uninspired by the parity which left the league without any dominant teams or captivating new superstars. Revenues fell and interest waned. In what many now regard as the low point in NBA history, game six of the 1980 league finals between the Los Angeles Lakers and the Philadelphia 76ers was televised late at night on taped delay. NBA commissioner David Stern would later call it "our biggest public relations disaster of the decade." At this moment, however, the league began its return to public popularity. Game six showcased the talents of Earvin "Magic" Johnson, the Laker rookie who, along with the Boston Celtics' Larry Bird, had riveted public attention in the NCAA finals a year earlier. Johnson, filling in for the injured Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, put on a tremendous show. He collected 42 points, 15 rebounds, and 7 assists. It was a performance that foreshadowed the Lakers' nearly decade-long stranglehold on the championship. From 1980 to 1989 the Lakers played for the title eight times and won five of them. "Never fear," Johnson told his teammates as they boarded a flight for game six without their captain and star player, "E.J. is here." He might as well have been speaking to the entire league and most of its fans. In the years to come, clashes between Johnson's Lakers and Bird's Celtics would resuscitate fan interest and inspire fellow players toward remarkable individual and team accomplishments. As Golden State Warrior Chris Mullin later explained, "what they did, for the player and the spectator, was to give the lesson that you played hard on every play, every night, every season. You were unselfish and you were fundamentally sound. And if you did those things, you won." In addition to the Lakers' success with Johnson, Boston with Bird in the lineup returned to the finals in 1981 and each year from 1984 to 1987, winning three titles. The level at which Bird and Johnson played and the heights to which they took their respective teams enthralled the basketball-watching public and inspired a financial and popular resurgence that carried the league toward astronomical revenue totals, player contracts, and television ratings as well as to expansion in new markets by the decade's end.
The Trey
Looking to spice up their product, the league's board of governors voted to introduce a three-point shot into the professional game at the start of the 1980-1981 season. The shot had worked well in the old American Basketball Association (ABA), leading to higher scores and last-second drama. The NBA was in need of both elements and was willing to alter the shape of the game in order to get them. Not since the narrowing of the key (and the penalty for spending three seconds there) and the introduction of the 24-second clock had the game been so consciously and so profoundly altered. Inevitably, there was resistance to the change from those who thought that it suggested a kind of pandering to the public and represented a threat to the game. Among the dissenters was Golden State Warrior owner Franklin Miculi, who stormed out of the vote and declared that "changing the 2-point basket is immoral!" Such protests aside, NBA commissioner Lawrence O'Brien successfully guided the idea into the rule book. At the meeting's end O'Brien gushed, "I think that I shall never see a thing more lovely than a three." In what began as a one-year trial, the three-point line was established at 22 feet from the basket in the corners and 23 feet 9 inches at the top of the arc. Teams and players alike were slow to understand and exploit the significance of the new rule, thinking of it mainly as a desperation shot at the end of games. In its first year of existence teams collectively took just over 5,000 shots from three-point land, making 28 percent of them. The Boston Celtics, who would post the league's best record and win the championshio over Houston, were quick to realize that this new shot had strategic benefits. It opened up the middle of the court for their dominant inside players and forced the opposition to play more honest man-to-man defense. They began shooting the shot in the course of their regular offense and had the league's most efficient shooter from "downtown" in Chris Ford. Fans were excited by the new rule and its potential to infuse games with drama at any moment. The rule also provided an opportunity for experienced ABA transplants to succeed in the NBA. The Celtics' successful approach to the shot was soon mimicked by other clubs, and the one-year trial became an established part of the NBA game. By the end of the 1980s teams collectively attempted more than 13,400 threes a season and hit nearly one-third of them. Efficient three-point marksmen like Dale Ellis and Danny Ainge managed to extend their careers well into the 1990s because of their ability to "knock down the trey" consistently.
All But Unstoppable
In stark contrast to the flash and hype surrounding Johnson and Bird stood the relentless rebounder and scorer Moses Malone. Malone dominated the backboards and thought of the lane as his territory. "I love to rebound," said Malone. "Scorers will have off nights. But the boards. They'll be there." One of the few players to make the jump from high school straight to the professional ranks, Malone felt he had something to prove and set about proving it every night. Without a college education he was often considered slow or unpolished by reporters who mistook his reticence for dimwittedness. But he understood the workings of the game as well as any other player of his time, and he understood the nature of the challenges he faced like no one else: "people thought we [those players who skipped college] had problems and that's why I didn't go to college. But they're the fools. We had to have strong minds to do what we did…All along, I thought that if I make mistakes, it's going to be me that makes 'em." Malone's determination propelled the underdog Houston Rockets to the NBA finals in 1981, where they were defeated in six games despite Malone's efforts. His teammates at the time recognized Malone's talents and were the first to speak of his place in history. "When my grandkids grow up, I'm going to tell them about this big fella," said guard Robert Reid. "By then he'll be known as the best of them all." Malone won the league's MVP award in 1980 and again in 1982, but he was unable to win a championship in Houston. In 1982 he became a free agent. Remarkably, there were no bids for Malone's services, and he did not find a new home until he was traded to Philadelphia before the start of the 1982—1983 season. Upon his arrival in Philadelphia Malone assured 76er fans and the media that they were in good hands. "I can do so many things," he said. Eager to fit in with an already impressive team, Malone explained that it was still Julius Erving's team and that he was just there to "work hard." The combination of Malone's inside strength and Erving's play in the open court made Philadelphia nearly unstoppable. They rolled through the regular season and marched toward the playoffs. Asked to predict their performance in the postseason, Malone responded, Fo', fo' and fo," to indicate that they were untouchable and would not lose a single game. He was not far off. With the exception of a second-round loss to Milwaukee, the Sixers played flawlessly in capturing their first championship since 1967. Malone would stay with Philadelphia through 1986 and then play four productive years with the Washington Bullets before slowing down in the early 1990s. By the time he retired Malone had established himself as one of the game's all-time greats. He played in eleven All-Star games and won three MVP awards and five rebounding titles.
Direction
NBA commissioner Lawrence O'Brien stepped down after the 1983 season and was replaced by his executive vice president, David Stern. If one half of the league's formula for renewal was found on the court in the figures of Larry Bird, Magic Johnson, and Michael Jordan, the other half lay in David Stern's vision and determination. At the time, the league's gross nonretail revenue, including ticket sales and television fees, was $160 million. By the close of the 1980s that figure would reach $500 million and was augmented by a staggering $750 million in gross retail revenues. While the game was thriving on the court, Stern made sure the league was also financially and commercially successful. His leadership made him the undisputed champion of professional sports commissioners. Looking back on Stern's tenure, E. M. Swift suggested that the former lawyer "reshaped a floundering, financially strapped league into an entity that is the envy of professional sports—an innovative, multifaceted, billion-dollar global marketing and entertainment company whose future literally knows no bounds." He accomplished this by stressing innovation and improvement. After the 1980-1981 season sixteen of the NBA's twenty-three teams lost money, and teams played to an average of only 10,201 fans per game, only a little more than 50 percent of capacity. The commissioner's office had one person working in public relations, and advertisers wanted nothing to do with the league. From the beginning Stern brought a determinedly progressive perspective to bear upon the workings of the league. As Richard Bloch, part owner of the Phoenix Suns, suggested, "David changed the direction of the league." Stern charmed a fractured group of team owners and players into forming alliances and rethinking the way they conducted business. Creating a Team Services division to monitor the workings and public relations of individual franchises, Stern managed to package the league as a single product. Perhaps the most crucial element in this packaging was negotiated by Stern before assuming the commissioner's post. In search of a financial agreement between players and owners which would ensure the survival of all NBA teams, the league and the Players Association agreed to a salary cap under which players received 53 percent of gross revenues and the owners 47 percent. As Charles Grantham, onetime head of the NBA Players Association, indicated, the cap was
RECONSTRUCTED KNEES AND EGOS
On 23 March 1985 New York Knicks star forward Bernard King made such a powerful turn toward the basket that, in the words of sportswriter Bruce Newman, "he simply ran out of his knee the way someone else might twist out of his shoe." At the time of his injury King was leading the National Basketball Association (NBA) in scoring, and the diagnosis of a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) left the Knicks" workhorse shattered. "I cried my eyes out," King admitted. "I never knew how far this thing would go, if I would have to retire because of it." His concern was warranted. The knee's flexibility is dependent on a series of ligaments connecting the femur and tibia; the ACL is one of two ligaments (the other is the posterior cruciate ligament) that cross between the thigh and shin, preventing the bones from slipping out of joint. While ACL injuries once portended the twilight of an athlete's career, especially in a sport such as basketball, which requires speed, explosiveness, and lateral quickness, the 1980s saw the refinement of sophisticated procedures aimed at reconstructing damaged knees. With the development of fiber optics in the mid 1970s, arthroscopic surgery—the insertion of a tubal telescopic lens through a small slit in the skin to survey joint damage before and during its eventual repair—became a less invasive procedure, and advances in physical therapy regimes lessened an athlete's rehabilitation time. The rise of sports medicine during the decade brought considerable acclaim to prominent surgeons such as Dr. Robert Jackson, a pioneer in arthroscopy, and Dr. Frank Jobe, a specialist on rotator cuff surgery who saved the careers of major-league pitchers Tommy John and Orel Hershiser. As Dr. Norman Scott observed, "Tve put out six books and 80-some articles, and yet I'11 go down as Bernard King's doctor. I just hope that in his life-time, Bernard has someone who makes him as proud as he has made me," Scott repaired King's ACL by replacing the damaged tissue with a strip of the tough sheath that runs from the hip to the tibia along the outside of the thigh muscles. The advances in arthroscopic procedures have not, however, lightened the emotional and psychological burden of rehabilitation. Danny Manning, the first pick in the 1988 NBA draft who tore up his knee in 1989, reported his experience: "You wake up with two scars on your legs—you know you weren't born with them. Even if you're no different physically, you're different psychologically." King himself went into seclusion for almost two years ("I felt I had to protect myself emotionally from the game"), but when he returned to the NBA for the 1987 season he once again reigned as one of the game's most creative scorers. By doing so he became a symbol of promise to every athlete who experienced the fragility of the body.
FOOTBALL
The game of American football as played today by high school, college, and professional teams grew out of rugby-style football which in the mid-1870s replaced a largely kicking game known as association football. Although initially played on village greens and on college fields, the first intercollegiate game took place on 6 November 1869 when Rutgers defeated Princeton 6–4 in a soccer-style game. Five years later, Montreal's McGill University playing at Harvard introduced rugby football, which would be rapidly adopted by eastern teams.
Collegiate Development
For the first fifty years of football, college teams enjoyed a virtual monopoly of what they called the gridiron (the term applied to the football field because of the lines drawn at five-yard intervals). In 1876, students at Harvard, Princeton, Columbia, and Yale met to form the Intercollegiate Football Association, all agreeing to play by rugby rules. Of the four schools, only Yale chose to re-main an independent. Nevertheless, Yale continued to meet with the other schools and played a crucial role in the adoption of new rules and in the popularization of American football. Beginning in the 1880s, the eastern institutions led by Yale played "big games" before large crowds in the New York and Boston areas. From 1880 to 1888, changes in the intercollegiate rules led to the transformation of British rugby into American football. The possession rule of 1880, which decreed that the team with the ball would keep possession if tackled, led to a series of further changes. The result was a game of physical contact and deception that had progressively less in common with rugby and association football.
The possession rule and the changes that accompanied it were associated with Walter Camp, a player for Yale in the late 1870s. A gifted strategist and promoter, Camp served as a coach or adviser to the Yale team from 1879 to 1910 and as the key figure on various rules committees. Through devices such as his All-America teams, he was also instrumental in making football a nationwide intercollegiate sport. Led by Camp, the handful of youthful rules-makers enacted the yards and downs rule (three downs to gain five yards), numerical scoring, interference in front of the ball carrier, and tackling between the waist and the knees (rather than above the waist). Players could move forward before the snap of the ball (momentum plays), and push and pull the ball carrier through the defense (mass play). As a result of these rules changes, football became noticeably rougher and by the late 1800s was criticized by clergy, newspaper editors, and some older college faculty and administrators for its dangers and brutality.In the 1890s, football spread rapidly to colleges in every part of the country. Spearheaded by former players or "missionary coaches," the teams closely followed the rules and rituals of eastern colleges, including Thanksgiving Day rivalries such as Michigan and Chicago or Stanford and California.As football gained in popularity with students and alumni, criticism of the game among faculty, college presidents, and crusading journalists grew more shrill, especially at a time when several players were killed or seriously injured each year.On 9 October 1905, just after the beginning of the football season, President Theodore Roosevelt met with six alumni gridiron advisers from Yale, Harvard, and Princeton, including Camp and Coach Bill Reid of Harvard. Roosevelt secured their pledge to draw up a statement in which they would agree to eliminate brutal and unsportsmanlike play. Contrary to a widely held belief, Roosevelt did not issue an edict to the colleges, nor did he have a direct role in reforming the rules. In October and November 1905, football at all levels had eighteen fatalities—three in college play—and 159 serious injuries.Following the death of a Union College player in a game against New York University, Chancellor Henry MacCracken of NYU called a meeting of nineteen colleges to consider the evils of football. That gathering in early December 1905 of twenty-four delegates led to a second, larger conference, which met in New York late in the same month. The more than sixty colleges represented appointed a reform rules committee. In addition, they organized themselves into the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (ICAA), predecessor of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), to challenge the older, big-college football committee. Meeting together, the two committees agreed to sweeping gridiron reforms, including the ten-yard rule (ten yards to be gained in three downs), six men on the line of scrimmage and a defined neutral zone between the teams, stiffer penalties, and the forward pass. Although the number of injuries declined under the new rules, another round of deaths and injuries in 1909 led to the enactment of more comprehensive rules between 1910 to 1912.
Football in the 1920s and 1930s
After World War I, both college football and the fledgling professional version of the game prospered as a result of the booming economy and the remarkable popularity of major sports. Thousands of gridiron enthusiasts flocked to the newly constructed stadiums modeled after the Harvard, Yale, and Princeton stadiums. In October 1924, Harold "Red" Grange of Illinois became football's best-known player when he ran for five touchdowns and passed for a sixth in a game against Michigan. After his final college game, Grange signed a contract with the professional Chicago Bears of the National Football League (NFL). He immediately played to overflow crowds in Chicago and New York and agreed to lucrative deals for endorsements and movie appearances. The highly publicized and profitable entry of the "Galloping Ghost" into pro football was a precursor to the wealth of NFL players later in the twentieth century.Just as football grew at the college level, it also took hold in the high schools. Football had been played at private secondary schools since the 1880s, and some public schools fielded teams in the 1890s and early 1900s. Promising players at private schools and high schools became the object of fierce recruiting struggles by the colleges. In the early 1900s, the emergence of the larger consolidated high schools created a need for football as a means of forging loyalties among large and diverse student bodies. Even before World War I, some coaches became known in high school football before moving up to the college level.
Football was also widely played as an unorganized, sandlot sport, or as a supervised playground recreation. By 1929, many of the serious injuries and occasional deaths in the first three decades of the twentieth century occurred during unsupervised play. Because of the need for protective equipment and adult supervision, youth leagues gradually evolved. What became the Pop Warner Leagues began as a local Philadelphia area football club in 1929. The organization was later renamed for Glenn Scobie "Pop" Warner, best known as a college coach at Carlisle Indian School, the University of Pittsburgh, and Stanford University. Beginning in 1947, the Pop Warner Leagues initiated their own national championship modeled after college and professional competitions in football and other sports.Professional football had originated in the towns of western Pennsylvania and taken root in the smaller cities of Ohio. In 1920, a group of midwestern teams met to form the American Professional Football Association, changed the next year to the National Football League. In the 1920s and 1930s, NFL teams often went bankrupt or moved and changed names, and professional football ranked a distant second to college football in popularity
and prestige. Only after World War II, with the advent of television and air travel, did the NFL and other leagues challenge the college game.
Post–World War II Football
Television, a medium that rapidly expanded in the 1940s and 1950s, proved well-suited to the gridiron game. After setting records in the first years after World War II, attendance at college football games began to slump from 1949 on. The alarmed NCAA members ceded to their TV committee the right to control or even to ban college football telecasts. In 1951, the NCAA contracted with Westinghouse (CBS) television network to televise one game each Saturday, later broadening the agreements to include several regional games. This cartel would help to strengthen the power of the NCAA, but it would also lead to near rebellion within the association in the 1980s.Although college football attendance revived, professional football rapidly surpassed its collegiate parent. A national audience watched a gripping telecast of the NFL championship game in 1958 when the Baltimore Colts won a dramatic sudden-death overtime victory against the New York Giants. Frustrated by the NFL's cautious approach toward expansion, the oil billionaires Lamar Hunt and Bud Adams began the American Football League (AFL) in 1959, with its first game in 1960. Bolstered by a network contract, the AFL challenged the NFL for blue-chip draft choices and TV audiences. In 1966, the AFL and NFL agreed to merge, and an annual championship known as the Super Bowl was played between the two leagues after the following season, though they would not become one league with two conferences until 1970. That year, ABC Sports innovator Roone Arledge teamed up with NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle to launch "Monday Night Football," an instant hit on prime-time evening television. Professional football franchises, which had once struggled for attendance, became businesses worth millions of dollars.Although the players' salaries rose, they would not reach the levels achieved by major league baseball until the 1990s. Strikes in 1974 and 1987 led to victories by the owners, who effectively blocked the free agency that had resulted in soaring salaries in major league baseball. Attempts to found new professional leagues—the World Football League in 1974–1975, the United States Football League in 1983–1985, and the XFL in the winter of 2000—failed to breach the NFL cartel. Only the Canadian Football League (CFL), arena football played indoors, the World League of American Football (an NFL minor league with teams mainly in Europe), and the Women's Professional Football League (WPFL) offered an outlet for players who could not play in the NFL.Following World War II, African American players appeared in rapidly growing numbers both in college and professional ranks. In college football, a handful of black players had participated since the 1890s in the East, Midwest, and West. In addition to being subjected to harassment and brutality, these players were by mutual consent "held out" of games with southern teams. In the postwar years, colleges outside the South refused to accept these "gentlemen's agreements" that kept blacks out of games. Except in the South, the number of African American players grew steadily in the 1950s. Southern teams were not integrated until the late 1960s and early 1970s. In 1961, Ernie Davis of Syracuse became the first African American Heisman Trophy winner.African Americans had played professional football in the early 1900s. A handful played in the early years of the NFL. In 1934, the league's last players, Jack Lilliard and Ray Kemp, were forced out of pro football. After World War II, the Cleveland Browns of the new All America Football League (AAFL) and the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL both integrated their teams, and the number of black professional players would show a steady increase after 1950.College Football in the Age of the NFL
In the 1960s, college football enjoyed a brief period of prosperity and relative calm. In the fall of 1966, 33 million viewers watched a fierce struggle between Michigan State and Notre Dame, the college game's version of the Giants-Colts showdown in 1958. ABC's innovations in telecasting and the advent of color television brought more revenue and recognition to big-time teams and their coaches.
Following World War II, many teams adopted two-platoon football in which teams had separate defensive and offensive units (the innovation doubled the need for scholarships and players). Unnerved by rising costs and wedded to past practice, the NCAA football rules committee attempted in the 1950s to banish two-platoon football but returned to unlimited substitution by the end of the decade. (Unlike the colleges, the NFL never tried to abolish separate offensive and defensive teams.)In 1951, nearly fifty institutions dropped football because of rising costs and dwindling attendance (some of these such as Georgetown, Fordham, and Detroit were ranked in the top twenty in the 1920s and 1930s). In the East, eight Ivy League institutions adopted joint rules deemphasizing football. They began less costly round-robin play in 1956 and eliminated spring practice, football scholarships, and postseason contests.
After World War II, the NCAA failed in its first attempt to regulate subsidies for supposedly amateur players. The subsequent scandals created support both for deemphasis of big-time football and for a nationwide system to enforce athletic codes of conduct. Other scandals involved booster clubs that funneled illicit payments to players and recruits. Beginning in 1956, a series of pay-for-play schemes were uncovered at five institutions in the Pacific Coast Conference, contributing to the conference's demise in 1959. Stepping into the vacuum, the NCAA levied stiff penalties against offenders, including bans on TV appearances. The commercial model pursued by many college football conferences led to charges that colleges had become the minor leagues for professional football. To some extent, the charges were true. Not only did the colleges supply the training for NFL recruits, but coaches also moved easily between the professional and collegiate ranks.
The quest for revenues in college football proved both a motivator for top teams and a cause of internecine quarrels. Faced with rising expenditures in the 1970s, big-time college teams opposed sharing TV revenues with NCAA members who had smaller football teams or no teams at all. Formed in 1976 as a lobbying group within the NCAA, the College Football Association (CFA) proposed to negotiate their own TV contracts. In 1984, two CFA members, Georgia and Oklahoma, won a Supreme Court decision against the NCAA, thereby ending the association cartel. Institutions and conferences within the association would now be responsible for their own TV contracts.Unlike professional football, Division I-A football, comprising the most prominent intercollegiate football institutions, had no playoff championship. Beginning in 1998, the NCAA initiated the bowl championship system to replace the mythical champion chosen by sportswriters and coaches. Using a variety of methods, including computer ratings, the NCAA chose the top two teams to play in one of the major bowl games, the designations of which rotated from year to year. Critics pointed out that college football still was the only college or professional sport that did not choose the champion by playoffs.
Conclusion
Beginning in the late nineteenth century, American football developed far differently from rugby football and association football (soccer, as it is referred to in the United States). Unlike baseball and basketball, American football has been largely confined to the United States and Canada. It has remained a predominantly male game, though a women's professional league has fielded teams, and female place kickers have competed at the high school and college levels. Whereas baseball was once clearly the American pastime, football has gained preeminence at the high school, college, and professional levels. In addition, football has developed a distinctive fan culture. Tailgating or picknicking in the parking lot, participating in booster clubs, and traveling vast distances for Bowl games or intersectional rivalries have become part of the football culture of dedicated spectators. Moreover, the availability of football through cable and network TV has transformed millions of television viewers who seldom attend a major contest into knowledgeable and enthusiastic football fans.