Sleepy Hollow is a 1999 American period horror film directed by Tim Burton. It is a film adaptation loosely inspired by the 1820 short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" by Washington Irving and stars Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Marc Pickering, Michael Gambon, Jeffrey Jones, Casper Van Dien, Ian McDiarmid, Michael Gough, and Christopher Walken. The plot follows police constable Ichabod Crane (Depp) sent from New York City to investigate a series of murders in the village Sleepy Hollow by a mysterious Headless Horseman.

Development for Sleepy Hollow began in 1993 at Paramount Pictures with Kevin Yagher originally set to direct Andrew Kevin Walker's script as a low-budget slasher film. Disagreements with Paramount resulted in Yagher being demoted to prosthetic makeup designer, and Burton was hired to direct in June 1998. Filming took place from November 1998 to May 1999, and Sleepy Hollow was released to generally favorable reviews from critics, and grossed approximately $207 million worldwide. Production designer Rick Heinrichs and set decorator Peter Young won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction.
In 1799, New York City police constable Ichabod Crane is dispatched by his superiors to the Westchester County hamlet of Sleepy Hollow, New York, to investigate a series of brutal slayings in which the victims have been found decapitated. A frequent user of new, though so far unproven investigative techniques such as finger-printing and autopsies, Crane arrives in Sleepy Hollow armed with his bag of scientific tools only to be informed by the town's elders that the murderer is not of flesh and blood, rather a headless supernatural warrior from beyond the grave who rides at night on a massive black steed.

Crane begins his own investigation, still remaining highly skeptical about the supernatural elements until he encounters the Headless Horseman himself. Boarding a room at the home of the town's richest family, the Van Tassels, Crane develops an attraction to their daughter, the mysterious Katrina, even as he's plagued by nightmares of his mother's horrific torture when he was a child. Delving further into the mystery with the aid of the orphaned Young Masbeth, whose father was a victim of the Horseman, Crane discovers within the Western Woods the Horseman's grave, as well as his entry point into the natural world from the supernatural — the gnarled Tree of the Dead.

Crane finds the Horseman's skull is missing, though the murders continue until Crane uncovers a murky plot revolving around revenge and land rights with the Horseman controlled by Katrina's stepmother, Lady Van Tassel, who sends the killer after Katrina now. Following a fight in the local windmill and a stagecoach chase through the woods, Crane eventually thwarts Lady Van Tassel by returning the skull to the Horseman, who regains his head and heads back to Hell along with his enslaver. With his job in Sleepy Hollow over, Crane, with Katrina and Young Masbeth, returns to New York, in time for the new century.
ig Fish is a 2003 American fantasy adventure film based on the 1998 novel of the same name by Daniel Wallace. The film was directed by Tim Burton and stars Albert Finney, Ewan McGregor, Billy Crudup, and Jessica Lange. Finney plays Edward Bloom, a former traveling salesman from the Alabama with a gift for storytelling, now confined to his deathbed. Bloom's estranged son, a journalist played by Crudup, attempts to mend their relationship as his dying father relates tall tales of his eventful life as a young adult, played by Ewan McGregor.

Screenwriter John August read a manuscript of the novel six months before it was published and convinced Columbia Pictures to acquire the rights. August began adapting the novel while producers negotiated with Steven Spielberg who planned to direct after finishing Minority Report (2002). Spielberg considered Jack Nicholson for the role of Edward Bloom, but eventually dropped the project to focus on Catch Me If You Can (2002). Tim Burton and Richard D. Zanuck took over after completing Planet of the Apes (2001) and brought Albert Finney and Ewan McGregor on board.

The film's theme of reconciliation between a dying father and his son had special significance for Burton, as his father had died in 2000 and his mother in 2002, a month before he signed on to direct. Big Fish was shot on location in Alabama in a series of fairy tale vignettes evoking the tone of a Southern Gothic fantasy. The film received award nominations in multiple film categories, including four Golden Globe nominations, seven nominations from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, two Saturn Award nominations, and an Oscar and a Grammy Award nomination for Danny Elfman's original score.
At his son's wedding party, Edward Bloom (Albert Finney) tells the same tale he's told many times over the years: on the day Will (Billy Crudup) was born, he was out catching an enormous uncatchable fish, using his wedding ring as bait. Will is annoyed, explaining to his wife Joséphine (Marion Cotillard) that because his father never told the straight truth about anything, he felt unable to trust him. He is troubled to think that he might have a similarly difficult relationship with his future children. Will's relationship with his father becomes so strained that they do not talk for three years. But when his father's health starts to fail, Will and the now pregnant Joséphine return to Alabama. On the plane, Will recalls his father's tale of how he braved a swamp as a child, and met a witch who showed him his death in her glass eye. With this knowledge, Edward knew there were no odds he could not face.

Edward continues telling tall tales, claiming he spent three years confined to a bed as a child because his body was growing too fast. He became a successful sports player, but found the town of Ashton too small for his ambition, and set off with the misunderstood giant Karl (Matthew McGrory). Edward discovers the hidden town of Spectre, where everyone is friendly to the point of comfortably walking around barefoot. Edward leaves because he does not want to settle anywhere yet, but promises to a young girl named Jenny (Hailey Anne Nelson) that he will return. Karl and Edward begin working at a circus; Edward works without pay, as he has been promised by the ringmaster Amos Calloway (Danny DeVito) that each month he will learn something new about a girl he fell in love with (at first sight). Three years later, having only learned trivia about her, Edward discovers Amos is a werewolf. In return for his refusal to harm him in his monstrous state, Amos tells Edward the girl's name is Sandra Templeton (Alison Lohman) and she studies at Auburn University.

Edward learns Sandra is engaged to Don Price (David Denman), whom Edward always overshadowed during his days in Ashton. Sandra makes Edward promise not to fight Don. Don beats Edward up when he learns about his feelings for her, but this only disgusts Sandra into ending their engagement and falling for Edward. Edward later reveals that Don died from a heart attack on the toilet bowl at an early age (as Don saw in the Witch's eye). During his recovery, Edward is conscripted by the army and sent to the Korean War. He parachutes into the middle of a show entertaining Korean troops, steals important documents, and convinces Siamese twin dancers Ping and Jing to help him get back to the United States, where he will make them stars. He is unable to contact anyone on his journey home, and the military declares him dead. This limits Edward's job options when he does return home, so he becomes a traveling salesman. Meeting the poet Norther Winslow from Spectre again, he unwittingly helps him rob a bank, which is already bankrupt. Edward suggests Winslow work at Wall Street, and Winslow thanks Edward for his advice by sending him $10,000, which he uses to buy a dream house.

Still unimpressed by his father's stories, Will demands to know the truth, but Edward explains that is who he is: a storyteller. Will finds Spectre, and meets an older Jenny (Helena Bonham Carter), who explains that Edward rescued the town from bankruptcy by buying it at an auction and rebuilding it with financial help from many of his previous acquaintances. Will suggests his father had been having an affair with Jenny, to which she replies that while she had indeed fallen in love with him, Edward could never love any woman other than Sandra. When Will returns home, he is informed his father had a stroke and is at the hospital. He goes to visit him there and finds him only partly conscious, and unable to speak at length. Since Edward can no longer tell stories, he asks Will to tell him the story of how it all ends: escaping from the hospital, they go to the river where everyone in Edward's life appears to bid him goodbye. Will carries his father into the river where he becomes what he always had been: a very big fish. Edward then dies, knowing his son finally understands his love of storytelling. At the funeral, Will sees many of his father's more unusual friends, including Amos, Karl, Ping and Jing, and Norther Winslow. Will realizes that his father's stories were true, only exaggerated, making Karl a giant (he is, in fact, 7'6") and making Ping and Jing conjoined when they are merely twins. When his own son is born, Will passes on his father's stories, remarking that his father became his stories, allowing him to live forever.
Corpse Bride, often promoted as Tim Burton's Corpse Bride, is a 2005 stop-motion-animated fantasy musical film directed by Mike Johnson and Tim Burton. It is set in a fictional Victorian era village in Europe. Johnny Depp led an all-star cast as the voice of Victor, while Helena Bonham Carter (for whom the project was specially created) voiced Emily, the title character. Corpse Bride is the third stop-motion feature-film produced by Tim Burton (not including his short film Vincent), the first two being The Nightmare Before Christmas and James and the Giant Peach.

The film was nominated in the 78th Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature, but was bested by Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. It was shot with a battery of Canon EOS-1D Mark II digital SLRs, rather than the 35mm film cameras used for Burton's previous stop-motion film The Nightmare Before Christmas.[3]
In an unnamed European village, Victor Van Dort (Johnny Depp), the son of nouveau riche fish merchants, and Victoria Everglot (Emily Watson), the neglected daughter of hateful aristocrats, are preparing for their arranged marriage. Both have concerns about marrying someone they do not know, but they fall in love when they first meet. After the shy, clumsy Victor ruins the wedding rehearsal, he flees and practices his wedding vows in the nearby forest, placing the wedding ring on an upturned tree root.

The root turns out to be the finger of a dead young woman clad in a tattered bridal gown, who rises from the grave believing that she is now Victor's wife. Spirited away to the surprisingly festive Land of the Dead, the bewildered Victor learns the story of Emily (Helena Bonham Carter) his new “bride”, murdered years ago on the night of her elopement. Meanwhile, Victoria's parents hear that Victor has been seen in another woman's arms, and become suspicious.

Emily gives Victor a wedding present which after he opens it, believes to be full of bones much to his shock. However, the bones assemble themselves into the form of a playful dog, whom Victor recognises as his old pet dog, Scraps, who he is delighted to see. Victor then comes up with an idea to trick Emily into taking him back to the Land of the Living by pretending he wants her to meet his parents. She agrees to this and takes him to see Elder Gutknecht (Michael Gough), the kindly ruler of the underworld, to send him and Emily temporarily to the Land of the Living. Once back home, Victor asks Emily to wait in the forest while he rushes off to see Victoria and confesses he wishes to marry her as soon as possible, and she too gladly returns his feelings. Emily soon arrives and sees the two of them together and feeling betrayed and hurt, she drags Victor back to the Land of the Dead and, after a brief argument, wanders off heartbroken.

Victoria tells her parents that Victor has been forcibly wed to a dead woman, but they believe she has lost her mind and lock her up in her bedroom. With Victor gone, Victoria's parents decide to marry her off to a presumably wealthy newcomer in town named Lord Barkis Bittern (Richard E. Grant), and do so against her will.

Victor comes to Emily's home where she is seen still heartbroken, playing the piano. Victor apologises for lying to her and he plays the piano alongside her. The two share smiles after playing a duet and have reconciled. Then Victor's family coachman appears in the afterlife (having recently died) and informs Victor of Victoria's impending marriage to Lord Barkis. Victor frets about having lost his chance with Victoria, and overhears Elder Gutknecht state that the marriage between Victor and Emily is invalid as death has already parted them. Victor must die to make the vows valid. Emily feels awkward about this and says she could never ask him to die for her, but he enters the room and he agrees to do so despite Elder Gutknecht's warning that if he does he will never be able to return to the Land of the Living. All of the dead go “upstairs” to the Land of the Living to perform the ceremony. Upon their arrival, there is a temporary panic among the living until each side recognizes each other's loved ones and they have a joyous reunion under the bizarre circumstances.

After a quarrel with Lord Barkis, Victoria follows the procession of dead to the church. As Victor prepares to drink a cup of poison to kill himself, Emily notices Victoria and has second thoughts, realizing that she is denying Victoria her chance at happiness. Lord Barkis interrupts them, and Emily recognizes him as her former fiance, who murdered her for her dowry. Lord Barkis tries to kidnap Victoria at swordpoint, but Victor stops him and the two men duel. Emily intercedes to save Victor, and Lord Barkis mockingly proposes a toast to Emily, accidentally drinking the cup of poison. The dead drag the "new arrival" away to the Land of the Dead, presumably to punish him for his evil.

Emily sets Victor free of his vow to marry her, giving the wedding ring back to Victor and her wedding bouquet to Victoria before exiting the church. As she steps into the moonlight, she transforms into hundreds of moths, presumably finding her eternal rest, as Victor and Victoria look on.
Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street is a 2007 black comedy horror musical film directed by Tim Burton. It is an adaptation of Stephen Sondheim and Hugh Wheeler's Tony Award-winning 1979 musical. It re-tells the Victorian melodramatic tale of Sweeney Todd, an English barber who murders his customers with a straight razor and, with the help of his accomplice, Mrs. Lovett, processes their corpses into meat pies.

Having been struck by the cinematic qualities of Sondheim's musical while still a student, Burton had entertained the notion of a film version since the early 1980s. However, it was not until 2006 that he had the opportunity to realize this ambition, when DreamWorks announced his appointment as replacement for director Sam Mendes, who had been working on such an adaptation. Sondheim, although not directly involved, was extensively consulted during the film's production.

It stars Johnny Depp as Sweeney Todd and Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Lovett. Depp, not known for his singing, took lessons in preparation for his role, which producer Richard D. Zanuck acknowledged was something of a gamble. However, Depp's vocal performance, despite being criticized as lacking certain musical qualities, was generally thought by critics to suit the part (see Music section below).

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street was released in the United States on December 21, 2007, and in the United Kingdom on January 25, 2008, to largely enthusiastic reviews. The film won a number of awards, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Academy Award for Best Art Direction. Johnny Depp was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor. Although not an outstanding financial success in the U.S., it performed well worldwide, and has spawned a soundtrack album and various DVD releases.
Benjamin Barker (Johnny Depp), a skilled barber, returns to London assuming the alias "Sweeney Todd", accompanied by sailor Anthony Hope (Jamie Campbell Bower). Fifteen years earlier, Barker had been falsely charged and sentenced to a life of hard labour in Australia by the corrupt Judge Turpin (Alan Rickman), who had lusted after his wife, Lucy (Laura Michelle Kelly). At Mrs. Nellie Lovett's (Helena Bonham Carter) meat pie shop in Fleet Street, he learns that Lucy poisoned herself with arsenic after Turpin raped her. Todd's teenage daughter Johanna (Jayne Wisener) is now Turpin's ward and, like her mother before her, is the object of Turpin's unwanted affections. Todd vows revenge, reopening his barber shop in the upstairs flat after Mrs. Lovett returns his old straight razors to him.

While roaming London, Anthony spots Johanna in an upstairs room of a large house singing to her birds, and a beggar woman tells him her name. Anthony is instantly smitten with her, and Turpin invites him in, only for Turpin's associate Beadle Bamford (Timothy Spall) to throw him out. Though Bamford warns Anthony that he will be punished if he is seen there again, the sailor becomes convinced that he and Johanna are meant to be together.

During a visit to the marketplace, Todd denounces a fraudulent hair tonic by faux-Italian barber Adolfo Pirelli (Sacha Baron Cohen), and humiliates him in a public shaving contest, winning £5 and gaining the attention of Beadle Bamford. Todd becomes impatient while waiting for Beadle Bamford to arrive at his shop; Mrs. Lovett consoles him when Pirelli and his boy assistant Tobias Ragg (Ed Sanders) arrive. Mrs. Lovett keeps Toby occupied downstairs, while in the parlor Pirelli reveals himself to be Todd's former assistant, Davy Collins, and attempts to blackmail him, demanding half of Todd's earnings or he will reveal his true identity to Judge Turpin. Instead of giving Pirelli a payoff, Todd beats him with a boiling kettle. He then stuffs Pirelli in a trunk to hide him from Toby, later slitting his throat upon realizing that he is still alive.

After receiving some advice from the Beadle, Turpin, intending to propose to Johanna, pays a visit to Todd's parlor to groom himself. Todd shaves Turpin while preparing to slit his throat; before he can do so, however, they are interrupted by Anthony, who bursts in and reveals his plan to elope with Johanna before he realizes Turpin is there. Turpin leaves enraged, vowing never to return. His chance at revenge missed, Todd swears revenge on the entire world and vents his murderous rage upon his customers while waiting for another chance to kill Turpin. He is indiscriminate about his killings, believing that he is punishing the corrupt aristocracy for their exploitation of those below them, while saving the lower classes from their misery. Mrs. Lovett becomes his willing accomplice, suggesting they dispose of the bodies by baking them into pies to improve her business. Todd rigs his barber's chair with a pedal-operated mechanism, which deposits his victims through a trap door into Lovett's bakehouse. Meanwhile, Anthony begins to search for Johanna, who was sent by Turpin to Fogg's insane asylum upon discovering her plans to elope with Anthony.

The barbering and pie-making business prospers financially, and Lovett takes in Toby. With both of the shops being such a success, Mrs. Lovett informs Todd of her plans to move to the seaside. Anthony finally discovers Johanna's whereabouts, and under advice from Todd, he poses as a wig-maker's apprentice, who are allowed into asylums to collect hair for wigs, thus providing him the access he needs to rescue Johanna. Todd comes up with a new plan to lure Turpin back, and has Toby deliver a letter to him telling him where Johanna will be brought when Anthony frees her. Toby has become wary of Todd and tells Mrs. Lovett, unaware of her role in the crimes: he promises to protect her, loving her as a surrogate mother. Beadle Bamford arrives at the barber shop, informing them that neighbors complain of the stink coming out of the chimney. He is murdered by Todd, and Mrs. Lovett informs him of Toby's suspicions. The pair search for Toby, whom Mrs. Lovett has locked in the basement bakehouse to keep him out of the way. Toby is nowhere to be found, having hidden in the sewers after seeing the Beadle's body drop into the room from the trap door above, as well as finding a toe in a pie. Meanwhile, Anthony frees Johanna and brings her to the shop in disguise, while locking an asylum staff-member in a cell, where it is implied the inmates kill him, where she hides herself in a trunk in a corner of the room while Anthony finds a coach.

The insane beggar woman who has been pestering Todd, Lovett and Anthony throughout the film makes her way into the shop seemingly searching for the Beadle. As Todd enters, she claims that she recognizes him. Just then, Turpin's voice is heard. Todd quickly slits the beggar woman's throat and deposits her body through the trap door. As Turpin enters, Todd explains to him that Johanna had repented, and offers a free shave. Todd reveals his true identity to Turpin and stabs him in the neck numerous times before finally slitting his throat and dropping him through the trap door, creating the biggest bloody mess of the film. As Johanna peeks out of the trunk, Todd spots her and prepares to slit her throat as well, not recognizing her as his daughter. A scream from Lovett diverts him to the basement, where she tells him that Turpin had still been alive and tried to grab at her dress before bleeding to death. Viewing the corpses in the light of the bakehouse fire, Todd discovers that the beggar woman was his wife Lucy, whom he had believed to be dead based on Lovett's account of the poisoning. Todd realizes that Lovett knew Lucy was alive, and she attempts to convince him that she misled him for his own good, confessing she loves him. Todd pretends to forgive her, waltzing maniacally with her around the bakehouse before hurling her into the open furnace and locking her in. He returns to Lucy and cradles her dead body as a vengeful Toby emerges from the sewer and picks up the discarded razor. Todd appears to hear him and raises his head, allowing Toby to slit his throat. His neck bleeds out as the screen fades to the credits.
9 is a 2009 American computer-animated science fantasy film directed by Shane Acker and produced by Tim Burton and Timur Bekmambetov. The film stars the voices of Elijah Wood, John C. Reilly, Jennifer Connelly, Crispin Glover, Martin Landau and Christopher Plummer.[2][3] It is based on Acker's Academy Award-nominated 2005 short film of the same name.[4] The screenplay for the film was written by Pamela Pettler, with casting by Mindy Marin, production design by Robert St. Pierre and Fred Warter, and art direction by Christophe Vacher.
An unnamed Scientist was ordered by his nation's dictator to create an artificially intelligent machine called the B.R.A.I.N. or the Fabrication Machine. However, the dictator used the machine to construct war machines, corrupting it until it revolted against mankind and used its machines and toxic gas to wipe out all known life. In his final days, the Scientist created nine ragdoll homunculus-like lifeforms, or "creations," using an alchemic talisman to bring them to life using parts of his soul. He died upon creating the final creation 9.

An unknown period of time later, 9 awakens in the Scientist's laboratory with the talisman. Wandering through the remains of the city, 9 meets the frail 2, a kindly inventor who gives him a voicebox to speak. The two are attacked by the Cat-Beast, the last remaining machine, which captures 2 and the talisman and takes them back to the Fabrication Machine's factory on the city's outskirts. 9 is wounded in the attack and collapses. He awakens in Sanctuary, a cathedral occupied by other creations, consisting of the dogmatic leader 1, his large guard 8, one-eyed engineer 5 who was 2's apprentice, and strange oracle 6 who draws countless sketches of the talisman. 9 decides to rescue 2, convincing 5 to accompany him. The two reach the factory, rescuing 2 thanks to the female warrior 7, whom 9 becomes immediately smitten by, killing the Cat-Beast. However, 9 places the talisman into the Fabrication Machine, reactivating it, causing 2's soul to be sucked out of his body into the talisman.

7 takes 9 and 5 to a library where they meet the twins 3 and 4, mute historians who show 9 footage of of the machine's origins. 9 and 5 return to Sanctuary to speak to 6 upon connecting the talisman to his drawings, but are caught by 1 and lectured to. The Fabrication Machine sends the bird-like Winged Beast to capture the group. They destroy the machine, but a fire burns down Sanctuary. The group flee to the library, but 7 and 8 are captured by the snake-like Seamstress, which uses 2's body as a hypnotic lure. After giving 2 a funeral, the creations head to the factory. 9 sneaks in but witnesses 8's death. He rescues 7 whilst the others push a lit oil drum into the factory, destroying it. As the group celebrate their victory, the Fabrication Machine appears and kills 5. The group flee across a collapsing bridge, but 6 is caught and killed, warning 9 to go back to the "the source", namely the Scientist's laboratory.

9 does so, finding a video message addressed to him. The Scientist instructs 9 to remove the talisman from the Fabrication Machine and use it to destroy it. 9 finds the other creations who are trying to destroy the machine with an artillery cannon. They are forced to flee, but are scattered when the Fabrication Machine detonates a box of unused grenades. 9 goes to sacrifice himself so 7 can remove the talisman, but 1 steps in having had a change of heart and is killed. 9 removes the talisman and destroys the Fabrication Machine, freeing the trapped souls of the dead creations from its body. In the final scene, the survivors have built funeral pyres for the dead, 9 opening the talisman which releases the souls of 1, 2, 5, 6 and 8, who fly up into the clouds and cause it to rain, a close-up of the raindrops revealing bacteria inside them.
Alice in Wonderland is a 2010 American computer-animated/live action fantasy adventure film directed by Tim Burton, written by Linda Woolverton, and released by Walt Disney Pictures. The film stars Mia Wasikowska, Johnny Depp, Helena Bonham Carter, Anne Hathaway, Crispin Glover, Michael Sheen, Matt Lucas and Stephen Fry.

The film is inspired by Lewis Carroll's 1865 fantasy novel Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and its 1871 sequel Through the Looking-Glass. Wasikowska plays the now nineteen-year-old Alice who, 13 years after her previous visit, returns for the first time as a young woman. She is told that she is the only one who can slay the Jabberwocky, a dragon-like creature controlled by the Red Queen who terrorizes Underland's inhabitants.

The film premiered in London at the Odeon Leicester Square on February 25, 2010, and was released in Australia on March 4, 2010, and the United States and the United Kingdom on March 5, 2010, through IMAX 3D and Disney Digital 3D, as well as in traditional theaters. Despite its short theatrical release window and mixed reviews, the film grossed over $1 billion worldwide. At the 83rd Academy Awards, Alice in Wonderland won for Best Art Direction and Best Costume Design. As of July 2011, it is the ninth highest-grossing film of all time.
Troubled by a strange recurring dream and mourning the loss of her beloved father, nineteen-year-old Alice Kingsleigh attends a garden party at Lord Ascot's estate, where she is confronted by an unwanted marriage proposal and the stifling expectations of the society in which she lives. Unsure of how to reply, and increasingly confused, she runs away to chase after a rabbit in a blue waistcoat, and accidentally falls into a large rabbit hole. She is transported to a world called Underland, where she is greeted by the White Rabbit, the Dormouse, the Dodo, and Tweedledum and Tweedledee. They argue over her identity as "the right Alice", who it is foretold will slay the Red Queen's Jabberwocky on the Frabjous Day and restore the White Queen to power. The group is then ambushed by the Bandersnatch and a group of playing-card soldiers led by the Knave of Hearts. Alice escapes and flees into the woods.

“Inspector, do I understand you to say that one of my family has killed three times to keep my husband’s
secret love affair out of the public eye?”
“Indeed, Mrs. Ellis. That’s how it appears.”
“Well, you’re wrong. Why should any of us kill poor George or Davis, or even Dr. Tilton, when the child is
here in this house, for all the world to see.”
I felt cold. This was Lydia’s attempt to make certain that Roger couldn’t send Sophie back to France. I
couldn’t believe how misguided it was.
Inspector Rother stood there with his mouth open.
“I don’t believe you,” he said bluntly.
“Then I’ll prove it.” She turned back into the passage and held out her hand. Sophie Hebert reached for
her fingers, and in front of all of us, Lydia led her into the hall.
She stood there, looking around with large, uncertain eyes. And then she saw me, turned Lydia’s hand
loose, and rushed across the room to cling to my skirts, smiling up at me.
Lydia’s face froze.
Gran stopped stock-still, with such an expression of pain in her eyes that I took a step backward.
Margaret sat down suddenly, as if her limbs could no longer hold her. And Mrs. Ellis’s knees buckled. If
Roger hadn’t been quick enough to catch her, she would have fallen to the floor in a dead faint.
Holding his unconscious mother in his arms, Roger Ellis turned his back on the child, as if she were not in
the room.
I lifted Sophie into my arms, and she leaned into me. “I think it best for me to take Sophie back upstairs.”
Turning to Inspector Rother, I went on, “You have ruined a surprise, Inspector. I hope you are satisfied.”
But he didn’t hear me. Lydia started to follow me from the room, but Roger’s voice stopped her in
midstride. I left them there and carried Sophie back to the room where Gran had once played with another
small, fair-haired child, long ago.
She said, an arm around my shoulders, “Le chat?”
“Yes, we are going to see the cat. Will you stay there with it for a little bit? And I’ll bring you soup, perhaps
a little cheese, and more biscuits.”
As I opened the door, she got down from my arms and went to the low bed of cushions, climbing into
them and rousing Bluebell from her sleep. Giggling, she pulled a bit of green ribbon from her pocket and
began to drag it over the bedclothes. I thought Lydia must have given her that.
Shutting the door, I went back to the hall, where Lydia was standing over the still-unconscious form of her
mother-in-law while Gran was searching around the hearth for feathers to burn under Amelia Ellis’s nose.
Lydia looked tearful now, and I thought that her grand entrance at the wrong time had suddenly dawned on
her. Gran found part of a feather from a duster caught in a length of wood sitting by the hearth, and held it to
the flames for an instant. The nauseating odor of burning feathers filled the room, and she blew out the small
spurt of fire on the tip before hurrying to Mrs. Ellis’s side to wave it under her nose.
Mrs. Ellis moaned a little, brushing weakly at the feather to push it away, and then opened her eyes.
Looking around, she said, “Did I dream that Juliana was here?”
No one quite knew how to answer her.
Inspector Rother drew me to one side. “What happened? How long has that child been here? Why didn’t
the others know she was here?”
“Mrs. Roger Ellis wanted to—to make sure Sophie was comfortable here before introducing her to
everyone else. Sophie speaks only French, you see. And she doesn’t know these people.”
“Is Mrs. Lydia adopting her? The Captain didn’t appear to be keen on the idea.”
“She would like to, very much. There are procedures to be followed—” I let my voice fade away.
“So it’s not all that certain that the child will stay?”
I sighed. “She’s an orphan, Inspector. I’m not entirely sure what must be done.”
“They could still have killed Hughes, Merrit, and Dr. Tilton. Those women. Not knowing.”
“They could have,” I agreed. “But Mrs. Roger Ellis knew from the start that a search was being made. First
by Lieutenant Hughes, and then by her husband.” I was praying he wouldn’t ask me how Sophie came to be
here in the first place.
He cleared his throat, trying to attract the attention of a family who had all but forgot that he was even here.
Mrs. Ellis was crying, Gran was gripping her shoulder so tightly I could see that her fingertips were white
from the pressure, and Lydia was staring up at her husband, silently pleading with him.
Roger Ellis was very angry. The back of his neck was red above the collar of his tunic. He turned, saw me,
and came toward me, catching my arm and leading me to the outer door.
Inspector Rother shouted, “Here!” But Captain Ellis ignored him, slamming the door behind him.
If there was a guard posted, I didn’t see him, although a constable sat in Inspector Rother’s motorcar,
staring out across the emptiness of the heath.
I pulled free and said, “Blame me if you like. Then go back to your family. They need you.”
“This is why I didn’t want anyone to know about that child. By bringing her here you’ve ripped open scars
that had finally healed. You’ve given my wife the means to blackmail me for the rest of my days. You’ve
caused irreparable harm by interfering. Are you satisfied?”
I held my ground before his onslaught. “Captain Ellis. You never wanted to see that child because you
knew that if she looked as much like Juliana as George Hughes insisted that she did, you were more likely
to be her father, not Hebert. And you couldn’t face that.”
He put his hands over his face and brought them down again, as if to scour the very flesh from the bones.
“God help me” was all he said.
I reached up and touched him, then let my hand drop. “There is nothing you can do about the past,” I said.
“And there will be nothing you can do about the future. Your mother won’t let that child go now, and Gran will
support her in that. She will become a little Juliana, with all the promise that was taken away when the real
Juliana died. You must try to prevent that from happening. Lydia will help.”
“Lydia will want to keep her from them. For herself.” There was agony in his eyes. “What if Lydia dies?
Just as Alan did? What then?”
“You think—you believe that your mother or your grandmother could be a murderer?”
He shook his head, but I could tell he didn’t know how to answer me.
“Do you believe they could have killed the others—George, and Davis Merrit, and even Dr. Tilton?”
“I don’t know. Damn it, I don’t know. Why did you do this to me? To us?”
“I never intended to bring Sophie to England without your permission, without the arrangements only you
could make. The fire in the Rue St. Catherine changed that. I can only say I’m sorry. But in the end you would
have had to face up to Sophie. Thanks to George Hughes, too many people knew she existed, and that was
the end of secrecy for you.”
“Then why the killings?
“Perhaps,” I said wearily, “they have nothing to do with Sophie. And we’re just too blind to see it
We went back into the hall. Nothing had changed. Lydia had asked Daisy to bring tea, and now she was
coaxing her mother-in-law to drink a little. Gran stood behind Mrs. Ellis’s chair, a frown on her face, and
something in her eyes that disturbed me. Margaret and Henry sat in a corner talking in low voices. I could
see that she’d been crying.
But the cause of this, Inspector Rother, was standing by the window, where I was sure he’d been watching
Roger Ellis talking to me. He turned as we came in.
“I have to close this inquiry,” he said doggedly.
Gran spoke, and I hardly recognized her voice. “I think you will agree with me that my daughter-in-law is
not well enough to be interrogated. But I suggest that you consider the fact that if a body was found on our
property, it doesn’t follow that one of us is the murderer. Be very careful about accusations that you will not
be able to support when the Chief Constable of Sussex sends for you.”
“There are three men dead in Ashdown Forest, Mrs. Ellis. How do I explain them?”
“I’m not a policeman,” she answered him. “I’m not required to explain anything.”
Inspector Rother took a deep breath. “I must meet the doctor from Groombridge. As soon as I have taken
care of that, I’ll be back at Vixen Hill, and I expect Mrs. Ellis to be well enough to answer questions.”
And he was gone.
I stood there, looking at this shattered family. They stared back at me.
Gran said, “Why does that child know you better than her own father?”
I answered, “She’s been told she was an orphan. The reason she clings to me is that she knows me. I
must take her back to France, and then proceedings may begin to bring her here legally, if that’s your
decision. She—” I looked for a way to say it gently. “The nuns who have cared for her will wish to say goodbye.”
“No,” Mrs. Ellis said before Lydia could speak. “I don’t care how she has come to us. She’s here. Roger,
tell her that we don’t want Sophie to return to France.”
Caught on the horns of a dilemma, Roger Ellis said, “She’s not my child. Wherever her birth was
recorded, her father is listed as Gerard Hebert. I shall have to declare her illegitimate in order to claim her.”
Mrs. Ellis began to cry. Gran said, a hand on her daughter-in-law’s shoulder, “There must be a way.”
Lydia said, “What does it really matter? She’s here. We’ll simply keep her.”
I wanted to tell them that they couldn’t, that the nuns were grieving for a child they believed to have been
burned to death.
But before I could speak, we heard another motorcar pull up in the lane outside the door.
“See who it is. Tell them to go away,” Roger said to me, since I was nearest the door.
“It’s probably the doctor from Groombridge searching for the Inspector,” I replied as I went to the door and
opened it.
I stood there transfixed.
Simon Brandon was just stepping out of the motorcar, and his face was bruised, a cut ran from close to
his eye to the corner of his mouth, and one arm was in a sling.
“You’re still here,” he said. “I’m so sorry, Bess, but it has been a very long four-and-twenty hours.”
I found my voice. “What happened to you?”
There was a distinctly pleased note behind his words. “I had a small task to perform. Don’t ask, I can’t tell
you. But it ended very satisfactorily.”
He’d been in France. It was something he’d been eager to do since the day war was declared. But he’d
been set on the sidelines, an adviser, his experience consulted again and again, but his vast talents never
put to their full use.
“I’m very glad,” I said faintly. “Are you all right?”
“I will be in a day or two. More important, are you?”
“It’s been a very long four-and-twenty hours,” I answered in my turn, and he was instantly alert.
Roger Ellis was at the door. “Who is it? I told you to send them—” He broke off. “Brandon,” he said in
acknowledgment. And then he looked over his shoulder, before adding, “I think it would be for the best if you
took Sister Crawford back to The King’s Head. We’ve had a difficult time here, and she may feel more
comfortable in other surroundings.”
I turned to him. “I’m not leaving without Sophie. She’s my charge, not yours.”
“Sister—Bess. Give them a few days to get used to the fact she must leave.”
“If I give them a few days, they will have grown so attached to her—and she to them—that it will be
impossible to take her away. If you will ask Daisy to pack my things, I’ll go up and fetch Sophie.”
“For God’s sake,” Roger began.
But I said, “You didn’t want her.”
“Dear God, Bess—”
“There’s a solicitor in the Street of Fishes. Go and speak to him, if you want her.”
I walked past him and into the hall. It was going to be very difficult, even for me. But if I left her, for the Ellis
family it would be like losing Juliana all over again. And I didn’t know what else to do.
To my surprise it was Henry who came to my aid.
He stood up for me, saying, “It can’t be any other way for now. You must see that. She’s not yours. This
child. But if you insist on having her, there’s a proper way to go about it.”
When I came down with Sophie in my arms, there was no one in the hall but Simon Brandon and Roger
Ellis.
As Simon escorted me to the motorcar, Roger Ellis brought the valise that Daisy or someone had hastily
packed.
I suddenly remembered the Major’s motorcar, but before I could mention it to Simon, Roger Ellis came to
shut my door, saying to me, desperation in his voice, “Both Claudette and Gerard Hebert were fair.”
I knew at that moment that he couldn’t accept Sophie until Lydia believed that. And I thought she could be
brought around to it, given time. She too would prefer not to dwell on that night with Claudette Hebert. It
would be Mrs. Ellis and Gran who would fight hardest to hold on to the knowledge that Sophie was Roger’s
child.
And then Simon was turning the motorcar, and we were heading toward Hartfield, leaving Vixen Hill and
Roger Ellis behind us.
After we had reached the track, Simon spoke. “You’d better tell me everything.”
I did, ending with what, next to Sophie’s welfare, worried me most. “Who is the murderer, Simon? And is
it finished, all this killing?”
“Go back to the facts you know, Bess. Leave everything else out of the equation.”
I smiled. “Easier said than done.”
We were just coming into Hartfield. “What am I to do about Sophie?” I asked as she reached up to touch
my face.
“If you really want to return her to the nuns in Rouen, I’ll see to it for you.”
He had the means, I was sure of that. I wished with all my heart that I could leave Sophie’s future in
Simon’s capable hands. But the more contact I had with her, the harder it was to be objective.
“Let me think about it. Please?”
“You’ll have children of your own one day, Bess. She isn’t yours. She never can be.”
“It isn’t that, Simon. It’s what I’ve done to hurt so many people. I don’t want to make the wrong decision
about Sophie too.”
We had reached the inn, and when Simon had seen to the arrangements, I took Sophie up to my room
and settled her. She asked two or three times for le chat, and I told her that Bluebell hadn’t come to The
King’s Head.
After she’d been fed and put down to sleep, I went next door to Simon’s room and sat disconsolately on
the chair by the window.
“If I could fix it, I would,” he said gently.
I smiled. “Would it were as easy as that.”
Taking a deep breath, I began with the facts.
“George Hughes came here when Alan Ellis was dying. And nothing happened to him. He came again
when the memorial stone was to be set in place. And this time he was murdered. It’s possible that he went
to meet someone—the note I discovered—or that he encountered someone when he went for a walk that
last morning. He often went to Juliana’s grave.”
“All right. Let’s look at that. If he’d prepared to leave first thing—his valise in his motorcar, nothing left but
to say his farewells—why did he take the time to walk?”
“Everyone thought to say good-bye to Juliana. And then Davis Merrit, a blind man, went for a ride on the
heath after Lydia came to see him and told him what George had said. He often went riding. His horse
could find its way back to Hartfield, if the Lieutenant got lost. This time it did just that—but without its rider.”
“I’ll just look in on the child,” he told me and was back quickly. “Asleep. Go on.”
“The police believe Lieutenant Merrit rode out to find George and kill him. But how did he, a blind man as I
said, know where in all the heath to find George Hughes? Or that he was walking at all?”
“Had Lydia seen him on her way to Hartfield?”
“She never mentioned it. Nor did the police. So I must assume she didn’t.”
“And it wouldn’t be helpful to Merrit, if she spotted Hughes as she returned home.”
“True. Which must mean that somehow Lieutenant Merrit knew where and when to find George Hughes.
And that would explain why George went for such an early walk, even though he was in something of a hurry
to leave Vixen Hill and all the embarrassment he’d caused.”
“So far so good.”
I took a deep breath. “Simon. That message I found in the umbrella. What if it was dropped in there after
the meeting took place. A good many people were at Alan’s memorial service in the churchyard. Anyone
could have passed it to George Hughes then. But that leaves us with another quandary. Why would those
two men wish to meet? The police haven’t been able to come up with any connection between them so far.
Except Lydia.”
“They didn’t know where to look.”
“Good God, are you telling me that you’ve found a link?”
He nodded. “Actually it took your father’s connections to uncover it. There was a general court-martial two
years ago. Merrit and Hughes were asked to sit on it.”
“A court-martial? I would never—but what was the case?”
“A Sergeant, one Albert Halloran, was accused of shooting an officer in the back during an attack across
No Man’s Land. It could have been accidental, God knows there’s chaos in a charge, and no one can be
sure when he fires who will suddenly step in the path of the shot. But in this case, the Sergeant had had
words with the officer, and he was still angry when he went over the top. This was reported, and it was
decided to try the man to get to the bottom of it. The court decided, unanimously, that the shooting had been
intentional because the slain officer had warned the Sergeant that he was in danger of being sent back for
dereliction of duty. He was sentenced to be hanged, but before it could be carried out, he overpowered his
guards and escaped. It was thought that he managed to reach Boulogne and sail aboard a hospital ship
bound for New Zealand, but when the ship was searched in New Zealand, he couldn’t be found.”
“He’s back in England looking for revenge?”
“It’s possible. Bess, what was unique about Merrit?”
“He was blind.”
“That’s right. He couldn’t recognize faces.”
I remembered Lieutenant Merrit stepping out the door of Bluebell Cottage and tapping his way down the
street here in Hartfield. “But the blind often compensate by developing acute hearing. He could recognize a
voice. And when he learned that George Hughes was coming to spend the weekend with the Ellis family, he
wanted him to see the owner of the voice he’d heard.”
“Men who have served on courts-martial seldom meet to share a glass of beer in the local pub and talk
over the trial,” he agreed.
“William Pryor. Willy,” I said, getting up and walking across to the hearth to warm my hands.
“You can’t be sure of that. Only that someone here in Ashdown Forest could be Halloran.”
“Do you have any idea what this man Halloran looks like?”
“The description could fit half the men serving in the British Army. No distinguishing characteristics.
Medium height, medium coloring.”
“I’ll never be able to convince Inspector Rother to look into this. I wonder if George and Davis Merrit
actually did meet? Or if the killer got to each of them first?”
“Or if Merrit accidentally got the message into the wrong pocket.”
I shivered. “How awful! But George went to the churchyard that morning, didn’t he?”
“To meet Merrit—or to say good-bye to Juliana? We’ll never know.”
“Simon. There’s George Hughes’s accident. As he drove to Vixen Hill. He swore there was something in
the road. But when he and Roger Ellis went back, there wasn’t.”
“Halloran couldn’t have known when he was coming to Vixen Hill.”
“But he could. George stopped here, at The King’s Head, to brace himself for talking with Roger about
Sophie. He could have been seen in time to prepare the accident. If George was here in Sussex, Davis
Merrit would be able to have any suspicions confirmed. And so both had to die.”
“It’s too late to do anything about this tonight, Bess. But I think tomorrow we ought to speak to Roger Ellis
before talking to Inspector Rother or one of his constables. Meanwhile, I should lock my door, if I were you.”
I was halfway to the door when I stopped. “It all makes perfect sense. Except for the death of Dr. Tilton.”
“To throw us off the scent? It might raise eyebrows if the only victims had a link with Halloran.”
“Yes. Of course. He was found on the grounds of Vixen Hall. A case could be made for his learning
something in the postmortems, and coming to speak to the family. Or to blackmail them. Who can say?”
He touched the wound on his cheek. I thought it must be hurting. But Simon would never tell me if it did. “I’ll
walk you to your door. Don’t forget to lock it.”
“I’ll be all right. Good night, Simon.”
I opened Simon’s door and turned to walk down the passage to my room. And saw Gran standing in front
of my door, staring in my direction.
“Gran? Mrs. Ellis?” I said.
“Can we talk, Sister? Isn’t there a parlor downstairs?”
“I should look in on Sophie. It’s nearly time for her to wake up.”
“It will take no more than five minutes.”
I hesitated, then said, “Yes, all right.”
We went down the stairs and found the little parlor empty. Gran closed the door after her, saying, “I don’t
want to be interrupted.”
Sitting in the nearest chair, I reminded her, “You said no more than five minutes.”
“I’ve come to ask you if you thought that the nuns who had charge of Sophie could be persuaded to
accept a large sum of money in exchange for allowing us to keep her. I should think, given the situation in
France at the moment, money could buy many necessities for the children in their care. Medical treatment,
food, soap, clothing. Shoes. Children grow so quickly.”
“It’s not a question of money. Sophie is a citizen of France. There are laws. The nuns would be guilty of
breaking them.”
“At least you could ask, my dear. It could do no harm. And possibly a great deal of good. The other
children would benefit, and Sophie would have a new life with people who care very deeply for her.”
“She isn’t Juliana,” I said.
“I’m an old woman, Elizabeth Crawford. I know this child isn’t Juliana. But we could watch Sophie grow
into womanhood, which we were denied when Juliana died so tragically, and it would make up, a little, for all
we’ve lost.”
“I will speak to the nuns on your behalf,” I said. “But I can make no promises.” I’d said that once before. To
Lydia. Promising that I would at least look for the child.
“I can ask no more.” She nodded to me and opened the door.
“Have they taken Mrs. Ellis away?” I asked.
“They have. That idiot Rother wouldn’t allow Roger to accompany her. She insisted that she would be all
right. God help Rother if she isn’t.”
She left then, striding out the door with the support of anger to keep her strong.
I went back up the stairs to my room. When I opened the door I called softly to Sophie, so as not to startle
her, then crossed to the bed. The little nest of bedclothes that I’d made for her was empty. I looked around
the room, thinking that she might have crawled out of it and fallen asleep behind a chair or under the bed.
She wasn’t there. I opened the door and went down the passage to Simon’s room.
Even before I got there, I knew what must have happened.
While Gran had kept me busy in the parlor, Lydia must have slipped up the stairs and carried Sophie
away.
Simon answered my knock at once, saying as soon as he saw my face, “What is it?”
“Sophie is gone. I think Lydia took her. The elder Mrs. Ellis was just here—I think to distract me while it
was done. We’ll have to go after them.”
“Yes, get your coat. I’ll meet you at the motorcar.”
I ran back to my room for coat and scarf and hat, then raced down the stairs. Simon had already cranked
the motor and was behind the wheel. We were rolling almost as I shut my door.
“They couldn’t have too much of a head start,” I said.
“We’ll find them,” he said grimly.
Ahead of us, crossing the main street in Hartfield, was Willy. He paused in the middle of the street, staring
straight at us, then moved to the verge. I looked at him as we passed and saw that same expression in his
eyes. Sly, knowing that he was tricking us, enjoying the joke on us.
“He’s a healthy man, why isn’t he in the Army?” Simon asked with interest.
“He’s unfit mentally. Or so they say. He couldn’t take orders, follow instructions, be trusted in the field.”
“A very good disguise for a man who doesn’t want to fight.”
We were beyond Hartfield now, and there was still no sign of the Ellis motorcar ahead of us on the track.
“They’re driving too fast,” I said. “The sheep—”
Simon said nothing, his eyes on the road.
We had turned into the lane that led to Vixen Hill before we’d caught up. To my surprise, I saw that Gran
was driving I hadn’t known that she could. But then the war had taught women to do many things, and driving
a motorcar was the least of them.
We caught her up before she’d even opened the driver’s door. She turned and stared at us over her
shoulder, her face startled.
“Lydia isn’t with her,” I said sharply. “Look!”
Simon pulled up behind her motorcar.
“What is it?” Gran called. Stiff from the drive, she waited until Simon had come round to open her door
and help her out.
“Sophie is gone,” I said, reaching her as she stepped down and quickly scanning the empty seats. “I
thought Lydia had taken her—while you were speaking to me.”
“But Lydia didn’t come in with me,” she said. “She’s sulking in her room.”
“Are you certain?” I asked, looking up at the long window above our heads.
“Did you think I was tricking you with my offer? Of course I wasn’t. Go on, then, see for yourself.”
I opened the door to the hall and hurried up the stairs that led to the room above. I tapped lightly at the
door, then opened it without waiting for an invitation.
“Lydia?” I said, looking for her. But the room was empty, and I turned to run back the way I’d come. She
wasn’t in the sitting room, nor in the little room that Mrs. Ellis used, nor in the library. I opened the door to the
drawing room, and there she was, staring up at the portrait of Juliana, her face swollen from crying.
“Where is Sophie?” I demanded. “Did you come and take her?”

Three