To Change Your Life Forever, I’ll Show You How To Skip The Hard Part of 
Becoming Successful... And, Overnight, Become A Peak Performer Guaranteed! 

To find out more about The Zufelt Experience and how it can change your 
life [click here]. 

Network Marketing Training 

Learn To Earn—How To Make $100,000+ A Year In MLM—You receive 4 
hours of the most affordable, intense, results producing MLM coaching you’ve 
ever experienced... This is NOT the standard fare—it is refreshingly different. I 
help you eliminate every roadblock, challenge and problem you have that’s holding 
you back from achieving the success you so strongly desire in your MLM 
business. To read more about this business building training resource [click 
here]. 

The DNA of MLM Success Video Series—An incredible 6+ hours of the most 
intimate, intense, results producing MLM mentoring and coaching you have ever 
experienced. These videos are like having me sitting in your living room personally 
giving you more than 6 hours of personal one-on-one training. It’s like a 
network marketing brain dump from me to you! 

Here’s what one of Tahitian Noni’s top producers had to say… “Wow! In my 
25 years in the network marketing industry I have never been exposed to such 
potent, effective, no holds barred training. Zufelt’s done it again. The DNA of 
MLM Success Video Series ties everything together you must do to be successful 
in this business! You’ve got to get this for yourself and your downline if you 
want your business to grow.” —Doug Susol, Diamond Pearl Elite (highest level), 
Tahitian Noni 

Following the mentoring I give you in this training series, you will be well 
on your way to become one of the top producers in your organization, and you’ll 
have a sense of purpose, focused effort, and personal passion. For more information 
on this video training series [click here]. 

Zufelt Inner Circle—This is a community of support, training and mentoring for 
individuals in the network marketing industry. I know from personal experience 
you need concrete steps and specific directions to take and build your business 
for maximum profits with minimum time and money. You need to know what 
is working NOW! Not what worked five years ago, two years ago, or even one 
year ago. It’s my desire to take you and every member of the Zufelt Inner Circle 
to a new level of thinking about your business and yourself. To give you a 
new understanding of the untapped potential your business has, as well as a new 
excitement about the growth your business can accomplish. To find out about 
membership in this exclusive community [click here]. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



2 2 
Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

I can teach anybody how to get what they want 
out of life. The problem is I can’t find anybody 
who can tell me what they want. 

—MARK TWAIN 

W
W
hen you become aware of the root of achievement, every door you 
wish to go through will open wide. It truly is the key to success. 
Whether you use it to open the door or not is your choice, something 
you have total control over. Whether you choose to open the door or 
not depends solely on your heart-set, not your mind-set. 

A mind-set is a fixed mental attitude formed by experience, education, 
and tradition. A mind-set is not the reason you succeed. In fact, it is often 
the reason you fail. The things you have your mind set on are often either 
expediencies and emergencies or idle reveries, so your prevailing mind-
set lacks the power to sustain effort over time toward the kinds of lifetime 
achievements that bring real fulfillment. There simply isn’t enough passion 
and emotional power behind a mind-set to clear the pull of habitual 
“gravity” and launch you into orbit. 

Core Desires create emotions that originate from your heart. These are 
the emotions of intrinsic motivation, the power within. I refer to this as your 
heart-set—or simply what your heart is set on having, being, seeing, feeling, 
achieving, and experiencing. Your heart-set is a much more accurate 
guide and source of success than your mind-set—so follow your heart. 

27 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



28 . The DNA of Success 

Perhaps you have heard people say, “When he sets his heart on something, 
watch out!” Or “When her heart is set on something, get out of her 
way.” Maybe you have even used this phrase to describe something you 
really wanted: “I really have my heart set on going to college” or “I have 
my heart set on having a big wedding.” Have you noticed that when you 
have your heart set on something it usually happens? Why? Because in the 
pursuit of your heartfelt desires, you exercise real initiative, resourcefulness, 
creativity, and endurance—you simply find a way to make it happen. 
You do whatever it takes to get what you want. 

Why is great literature so replete with references to the feelings, 
desires, wisdom, and truth of the heart? Because the heart is the great 
center of our emotional intelligence and the ultimate arbitrator in the test 
of truth as we know it. We look to the heart—to our true feelings and our 
Core Desires—to determine a course of action. We look to the heart when 
making important decisions. We also look to the heart to assess what’s best 
for us. 

The first time I saw my wife, Marci, I was impressed with her beauty. 
On our first date, we went to a lovely restaurant and enjoyed a delicious 
five-course meal—and then sat there for another four hours, just talking. 
We opened up our hearts and discussed things that mattered dearly to us. 
We both took a great risk by sharing everything, including the not-so-good 
things about ourselves. We probably achieved a greater degree of emotional 
intimacy in that one evening than most couples do in six months of 
dating. We fell in love that night. 

I had never felt so comfortable with a woman in my life—I felt as if 
she knew me inside and out. By the time we ended our date, she knew my 
fears, my failings, and my doubts—including my fear that she might not 
like what she was learning about me—and she accepted me for the person 
I was and the person I could be. She also shared similar things about 
herself. We trusted each other with our hearts, and we liked what we saw. 
I knew then that I wanted to share my life with her. Five months later, we 
were married. 

“Few are they who 
feel with their own 
hearts.” 

—Albert Einstein 

I didn’t need to make a goal of having Marci 
for my wife, writing it down and affirming it each 
day. Instead, I simply followed my heart. Success is 
all about setting your heart on something you truly 
desire. 

So why are we sometimes so reluctant to follow 
our hearts? As children, young adults, and maturing 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

.


adults, we experience heartaches—and they hurt. As 
a result the idea of heart-set may connote a negative 
experience, such as the disappointment we feel when 
something we have our hearts set on doesn’t happen. 
We are then “heart-broken.” 

Marilyn Carlson Nelson, CEO of the 
Carlson Companies 

“You may see me as a woman who has power—the 
leader of a large company. But the power that matters 
is the power in my heart. It doesn’t matter if you are 
trying to make a deal that makes a huge difference, or 
trying to fix a problem within a company. Ultimately, 
you have to have faith in yourself. You have to have 
a sense that you will be personally accountable and 
do everything in your power to influence this world 
and make a difference. And, you have to know that 
there’s a limit to what you can do and a place where 
only God can make a difference. If you get that right, 
you will be successful. Don’t let anyone tell you that 
success has to do with money or power. Success has 
to do with living on your terms, and ultimately to 
make a difference. To live your days in such a way 
that if the time comes where you face some kind of 
illness, or if something happens that changes your 

“I believe that 
we are like 
instruments. 
Whether the 
instrument is used 
constructively or 
poorly depends 
on us. We have a 
good mind and a 
good heart. If we 
combine these 
two—the education 
of the mind and 
the compassion 
of the heart—then 
our contribution will 
be constructive. 
. . . You will have 
the determination, 
optimism, patience, 
courage, and faith 
to overcome all 
obstacles.” 

—Dalai Lama 

path and shortens your days, that you can say, ‘Okay. If today is my last, 
I’m prepared.’” 

Carly Fiorina, CEO of Hewlitt-Packard 

“At anyone moment you often can’t see where your path is heading and 
logic and intellect alone won’t lead you to make the right choices, won’t in 

fact take you down the right path. You have to master 
not only the art of listening to your head, but you must 
also master listening to your heart. You have all the 
tools you need up in your head and in your heart. All 
you have to do is engage your heart and your mind 
in every decision you make—engage your whole self 
and the journey will reveal itself with the passage of 
time. The lesson I learned early in life was to love 

“Only the heart 
knows the correct 
answer. It takes 
everything into 
account.” 

—Deepak Chopra 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



30 . The DNA of Success 

what you do—or don’t do it. Don’t make a choice of any kind, whether in 
career or in life, just because it pleases others or because it ranks high on 
someone else’s scale of achievement, or even because it seems the logical 
thing to do. Make the choice to do something because it engages your 
heart and your mind—all of you. Remember that the freedom to choose is 
yours. To make the most of that freedom, use your mind and your heart.” 

Cathy Lee Crosby 

“I once lost everything that I’d worked my entire life to achieve—everything 
I thought mattered—and yet I regained my connection with who I 
am. It’s almost as if the ‘wounding’ was sacred in its ability to reconnect 
me with the Divine purpose of my life. We can regain our sense of awe and 
wonder, our ability to create life from the core of our heart, and reenter the 
realm of pure possibility. We know that there is a better way to live, but 
often we keep this thought to ourselves because we are not sure what to do 
about it. We also know that we have gone outside of ourselves as far as we 
can possibly go, searching for answers to living a successful, yet meaningful, 
creative, and connected life. Now we come to the conclusion that there 
is no other direction to go but inside ourselves. 

“I’ve learned that this circle consists of the Divine energizing each 
of us, and each one of us, in return, utilizing this dynamic, creative force 
to glorify, reignite, and reconnect with the pure innocence of living from 
the core of the heart. The foundation of who I am is now cast in gold, and 
eternally fired by a direct connection to my heart.” 

Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, University of Chicago 
Professor and Author 

“This creativity in the way that you experience life—with originality, 
openness, and freshness—is creativity that makes life enjoyable, but does 
not necessarily result in fame or fortune. Everybody can have creativity at 
the personal level and make his or her life more interesting and more like 
a process of discovery. When you’re creative, you’re not always dancing 
to someone else’s tune. You develop your own rhythm of work and rest. 
For original ideas to come about, you have to let them percolate in a place 
where you have no way to make them obey your own desires or your 
own directions. Random combinations are those that are driven by forces 
we don’t know about. Creative people are playful and responsible at the 
same time. They work not for the result of the work they are doing, or for 
fame. They work for the sheer joy and exhilaration of doing it. They no 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

.


longer worry as much about the opinions of others. 

“If the heart is right,

The drive comes from within, from a sense that ‘I 

it matters not which

have to do this.’ It comes from a deep desire to create 

way the head lies.”

something beautiful. Each of us can spend our lives 

—Sir Walter Raleigh 

doing what we love to do.” 

MISLEADING MIND-SETS, POWERFUL HEART-SETS 

Mind-sets can be accurate from a rational point of view but still be wrong. 
For example, a management professor at Yale University once responded 
to a student’s proposal of a reliable overnight service that it was a “concept 
that is interesting and well informed, but in order to earn better than a C the 
idea must be feasible.” Fred Smith went on to found the Federal Express 
Corporation. In the end, the professor’s mind-set was wrong because his 
idea of what was feasible was limited. What is feasible, functional, possible, 
or proper to one person may be utter nonsense to a person who is 
working from the heart. 

Your mind-set may be that you must be an extrovert to be successful. 
Although extroverts can be successful, so can people who do not like the 
limelight. Some of the most quiet, most laid-back people I have known are 
extremely successful. 

Your mind-set may tell you that good sex is what it takes to have a 
good and happy marriage. Although sex certainly plays an important role, 
this is a very limiting mind-set. How you share your hearts is far more 
important than how you share your bodies. 

As you learn to live more from your heart, you will discover the 
Conquering Force. As you work more from your heart, you will unleash 
the Conquering Force in your behalf. Let your heart-set, rather than your 
mind-set, be your constant guide. Let your heart rule your head. 

J
J
ohn had very low self-esteem, and he tried to compensate for this by 
putting others down to build himself up. This behavior was motivated 
by a Core Desire to feel good about himself at any cost. 

John married a wonderful woman, Carol, who grew up with an alcoholic 
father. Early in their marriage, Carol exhibited some of the characteristics 
common to adult children of alcoholics. In particular, Carol couldn’t 
tolerate any 
criticism. Even the slightest hint of criticism was devastating 
to her. For twelve years John, who built himself up by putting others 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



32 . The DNA of Success 

“For as a man 
thinketh in his 
heart, so is he.” 

—Proverbs 


down, and Carol, who was so very sensitive, were at 
constant odds. 

Although John often said he would put an end to 
his criticism of Carol, the pattern persisted. John made 
it a goal to stop criticizing his wife and children. He 
even did daily visualizations and affirmations. Each 

morning, as John was showering, he would repeat over and over, “I will not 
criticize my wife, I am a noncritical person, I love my wife and my children, 
and I will not criticize them.” But each morning he would step out of 
the shower and find something to criticize in no time at all. 

John then redoubled his efforts, making even more positive affirmations, 
putting notes all over the place to remind himself, to no avail. John’s 
Core Desire to feel better about himself was greater than his commitment 
not to criticize. 

In their thirteenth year of marriage, John and Carol stumbled upon 
some luck. Carol was asked to go to the hospital to help her father through 
rehabilitation. The time had come for his family to tell him of the pain and 
sorrow that had resulted from his drinking; it was time for him to accept 
responsibility. 

During all this, John learned to understand how hurt his wife had been 
by not getting approval from her father. She remembered her father telling 
her, “I can’t believe you’re so dumb.” Even after she got her bachelor’s 
degree—in his specialty—and excelled in the business world, she felt she 
had never pleased him. All she ever wanted was his approval, but she 
never got it. 

When John came to understand how hurt Carol had been as a child by 
the criticism of her father, he was devastated. He felt so much compassion 
for her he wept. With his new understanding of how criticism made her 
feel, he made a heartfelt decision never to be the cause of that kind of pain 
or anguish for her. From that day forward, he was a changed man. Nothing 
else he had tried before had worked. The only thing that ended the years 
of criticism was when it became a heart-set. As much as he wanted to be 
positive, his mind-set just didn’t have the force to make it happen. 

A mentor of mine once told me, “If you think that you aren’t getting 
the things you want in life, you are wrong. You are getting exactly what 
you want.” 

I took him to task because I could think of many things in my life that I 
never wanted to happen. At the time I was working at a job that was severely 
limiting and causing me great stress. The job was just one bad thing. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



.


Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

“How can you say that I am getting exactly what 

“You will become 

I want in life?” I challenged. I knew I didn’t want the 

as small as 

job, and yet I stayed there. Once I understood what 

your controlling

my mentor was saying, I left the job. I have been 

desire; as great 

working for myself ever since. 

as your dominant 
Understanding your Core Desires—and how aspiration.” 
they are the source of true motivation—will help you —James Allen 
realize that you may be getting some greater benefit 
than what you say, or think, you want. For example, 
you may remain at a job you dislike because you need to pay your bills. 
Charles Garfield, who spent twenty years studying peak performers in 
every walk of life, wrote: 

Inherent talent—an inborn predisposition—is the wiring in one’s 
system that is unique to each individual. One can either identify 
and develop the specific talents and capacities he or she has, or 
leave them buried. Peak performers find compelling reasons to 
cultivate relevant inherent talents. Matching a mission to such 
gifts greatly enhances the possibilities of peak performance. What 
often happens is that a vast reservoir of hidden resources becomes 
available for use. 

Ababy in action—curious, energetic, reaching out to explore— 
embodies the inborn urge to grow, achieve, and excel. This motivation 
need not be taught, but can be untaught or squelched. 
Peak performers prove that human beings are meaning-seeking 
organisms. We are not only born in a state of arousal, excitation, 
and motivation, but we also seek to grow in a particular direction. 
What determines our direction? Passion and preference—an 
intense desire to do what we do. High achievers differ in what they 
call it—passion, preference, deep feeling, or intense desire—but 
they agree that it determines their direction. They can trace their 
performance more clearly to a preference than to an aptitude, more 
to how they feel about what they are doing than what they know. 

TURN ON YOUR HEARTLIGHT 

Although many people acknowledge that we are born with an incredible, 
God-given power to do, have, or become whatever we want, no one has 


http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



34 . The DNA of Success 

“Every game, 
you’ve got to play 
from the ground 
up. Most important, 
you’ve got to play 
with your heart. If 
you play with a lot 
of head and a lot of 
heart, you’re never 
going to come off 
the field second.” 

—Vince Lombardi 

explained what it is or how to turn it on. We wonder, 
“Where is the switch to my hidden energy?” 

Your Core Desire is the switch. Having your 
heart fixed on your Core Desires is how your latent 
talents, gifts, and abilities are unleashed. Once you 
have a genuine, clear, and accurately defined Core 
Desire, you will expend all the necessary effort, for 
as long as it takes, to overcome any obstacle in your 
way in order to achieve it. 

If you dismiss what you desire most, you also 
dismiss the very source of your power. Your Core 
Desires are not wishes, whims, or insincere and artificial 
goals, nor are they New Year’s resolutions that 

are made with little commitment to fulfilling them. They aren’t even wonderful 
dreams, or things that would be nice to have. Those will not bring 
results. Your Core Desires are the things in life that really get you excited. 
When a Core Desire is driving you, things may stand in your way, but nothing 
will stop you. 

OVERCOMING THE ODDS 

Colli Butler grew up with alcoholic parents. Her mother went through five 
marriages. Her father, who had more marriages than her mom did, left 
when she was a toddler, and she never saw him again. As a teenager, she 
had such a volatile relationship with her mother that she moved out of the 
home more than twenty times in just four years. She moved from place to 
place, often living with friends—always seeking a more stable and happier 
environment. Her life was hard, to say the least. She overcame seemingly 
insurmountable odds and this emotionally unstable background to become 
a highly successful woman in network marketing. And she has maintained 
a very happy and healthy marriage. 

By the time she was ten, she had seen women whose lives were full of 
suffering, sometimes brought upon themselves by making wrong choices. 
Colli learned from those negative examples and vowed never to make 
those mistakes herself. She got involved in building the spiritual area of 
her life, which has continued to make a positive impact on all areas of her 
life. She went after her success with all her heart. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

.


OH, WHAT A FEELING! 

“If you want 

something and 
We all have the innate ability to achieve what we you didn’t get it, 
most desire, no matter what barriers exist. When my you either didn’t 
son was twenty-two years old, he wanted to buy a want it or you tried 
truck so he could start a lawn care business. His Core 

to bargain for the 
price.”

Desire was to be more independent and self-suffi


—Rudyard Kipling

cient, but he needed to buy a truck. His former boss 
had a great truck. Having seen that truck at work, he 
knew that he needed one just like it. 

My son and I went to almost every dealership in the Denver area, to 
no avail. Although my son had excellent credit, he had no credit history. 
No dealership would finance him without a co-signer. When he asked me 
to co-sign, I turned him down. I told him I didn’t believe in making things 
so easy for children that they were robbed of the chance to stretch and succeed 
on their own. I offered to loan him money for a down payment if he 
needed it to secure financing . 

For two weeks every car door was slammed in his face, so to speak. He 
was naturally discouraged, but he refused to give up. Finally he decided to 
call his old boss to ask if he knew of any way he could get a truck like his. 
His boss said that he had recently purchased a new truck and that the old 
one was just sitting in his driveway. He then offered to sell it to my son— 
and even to carry a contract on it! Within hours, my son closed the deal 
and ended up getting the very truck that had inspired him in the first place. 
Such is the strength of a heart-set. When your heart is set on something, 
you don’t give up. You fight, dig, and scratch until you get it. Sometimes 
these things require blood, sweat, and tears. But when it is your heart-set, 
you will always find a way to make it happen. 

KARATE FOR THE HEAD OR HEART? 

Many years ago, when I was teaching karate, I could usually tell how 
well my students would perform from their motivation to learn in the first 
place. Often it was just a passing fancy, an ego trip, or a belt. But for others 
it was a burning desire. 

Once, a university professor approached me and told me he wanted to 
become a black belt in karate. In fact, he confided, it had been his goal for 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



36 . The DNA of Success 

“If you care enough 
for a result, you 
will most certainly 
get it.” 

—Robert Collier 

over fifteen years. Now, for the first time, he inquired 
what it would take to make his goal a reality. I told 
him that to achieve this distinguished rank in karate, 
he would need to dedicate at least one hour a day 
for four years. He was visibly disappointed. After a 
moment, he said, “I had no idea it would take that 

kind of effort.” He walked away and never again 
pursued karate. He had committed a wish to paper and somehow hoped 
it would magically happen, but he hadn’t even bothered to learn what it 
takes, let alone start on the path. When he discovered the amount of work, 
commitment, and time required to achieve a black belt, he lost interest and 
gave up. 

One week later, Mark Porath, a strapping fourteen-year-old, approached 
me and asked the same question. When I told him it would take him two 
hours a day and five years of his life, he responded, “Is that all? When can 
I start?” 

Mark’s heartfelt desire to earn a black belt was a Core Desire for him, 
and he went after it wholeheartedly. He was willing to do whatever it took 
to make it happen. 

Five years later, Mark was one of the best black belts I had ever seen. 
He went on to become the state champion, winning nearly every tournament 
he entered. Mark never wrote down that he wanted to be a black 
belt—he just wanted it with all his heart and went after it, not letting any 
obstacles stand in his way. 

Mark’s Core Desire originated from a serious physical disability. 
When he was born, his feet did not face forward but pointed outward. 
Until he was nine years old, the way he walked earned him the nickname 
“Penguin.” Because of his problem, he couldn’t run and play like the other 
kids, he could only watch. 

When he was nine years old, Mark underwent an amazing operation. 
Doctors surgically turned each of his legs and feet forward. He was 
in a body cast from his chest to his ankles for nine months. When they 
removed the cast, his muscles had atrophied and he had to learn to walk 
all over again. This experience left Mark with little coordination. Unless 
he was leaning against a wall, he couldn’t lift either of his legs without 
immediately losing his balance. 

Mark came to me wanting to learn karate, but without something to 
lean on, he would begin to fall when he began a simple kick. Before he 
could recover from a poorly executed kick, he would fall down. Suffering 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

.


from a deep feeling of physical inadequacy and a lack of self-esteem, he 
was angry at the world. 

But his desire to master karate came from deep within his heart. His 
lack of self-esteem drove him to excel. He wanted to be the best at karate— 
to prove to the world that he could be really good at something. 

This is what a heart-set looks and feels like. How else could Mark 
have invested so much time and effort, in spite of his physical challenge, 
and attain such a high pinnacle in karate? 

OVERCOMING BARRIERS AND OBSTACLES 

There will always be barriers and obstacles between where you are right 
now and where you want to be. If your desire is fairly strong, you will definitely 
get started on it. You will probably spend a lot of money and time 
on it, too. You may even get most of the way there. However, the day you 
encounter a barrier or obstacle that is bigger than your desire, you will be 
stopped. That’s the bad news. The good news is that there are no barriers 
or obstacles that can stop you when you are pursuing a Core Desire. The 
obstacles you encounter may be intimidating, they may slow you down, 
they may be difficult, they may hurt like crazy—but they won’t stop you if 
you focus on your Core Desires. 

When you are less than wholehearted, you are easily derailed. When 
your whole heart is committed, failure is not an option. Halfhearted athletes 
or teams will never become champions. A halfhearted relationship 
just doesn’t cut it. A halfhearted salesperson is destined to a life of mediocrity 
and financial struggles. Halfhearted will only get you halfway there. 
Anything less than wholehearted is destined to mediocrity or failure. 

Every obstacle yields to stern resolve, and resolve comes from Core 
Desires. The ability to make obstacles yield comes from your Core Desires 
and Conquering Force. 

In 1989 Melissa Poe saw a television show about what the world 
might look like in twenty years if our current levels of pollution continued. 
Melissa became very upset, and she decided to write 
President Bush, asking him to put up signs saying, “Obstacles cannot 

crush me. Every

“Stop pollution. It’s killing the world.” 

obstacle yields to

After not getting a reply from the president, she 

stern resolve.”

thought perhaps her letter had been lost in the mail 

—Leonardo da Vinci 

and decided to put up her own signs. She called an 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



38 . The DNA of Success 

advertising agency in Nashville, Tennessee, and 

“Where your 

asked them if they would put her letter to the presi


treasure is, there 

dent on a billboard. When they asked her what orga


will your heart be 

nization she was with, she created Kids FACE—Kids 

also.” 

For A Clean Environment. After they caught the 

—Matthew 6:21 

vision of what Melissa was doing, they agreed to 

help. She then asked them if they would put one up 
in Washington, D.C., where the president lives. 

The agency told her they didn’t have any billboards in Washington, 
D.C., but they gave her the name of a company that did. Melissa called 
them all and got them to agree to put up their own billboards. She kept getting 
more names of billboard companies and began calling them. Within 
a few months, over 250 billboards across the United States displayed her 
letter to the president. 

Melissa also tried to enlist the help of environmental clubs, like the 
Sierra Club and Greenpeace, but they each told her she would have to wait 
until she was older. At the time, Melissa was just nine years old. 

When Melissa started Kids FACE, there were only six members. But by 
the time she was sixteen, it had grown to over two hundred thousand members 
worldwide, and her newsletter went out to over two million people. 

B
B
oth Mark and Melissa had their hearts set on something, and their minds 
never told them they couldn’t succeed. Following their examples, we 
should all listen to our hearts. If we listen first to our minds, we will probably 
be led astray by the facts. 

Thinking you want something that at the core of your heart you really 
don’t want creates a huge problem. People write down goals as if they 
know what they want, but they really don’t. Most goals never come to pass 
because they aren’t genuine. They don’t come from the heart. Desires that 
come from the heart come to fruition. They become reality because you 

really want them. 

Success, then, does not come from wishes,

“Your own 

resolution to 

whims, impulses, goal-setting, daily affirmations, 
succeed is more visualizations, intimidation, or pressure. Nor is 
important than any it merely something that “would be nice to have.” 
other thing.” The DNA of all success is the combination of Core 

—Abraham Lincoln 

Desires and the Conquering Force. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



.


Heart-Set over Mind-Set 

The Zufelt Experience—The two and a half day event that has already 
dramatically 
changed lives! The question is, are YOU next? If You’ve Got The Guts 
To Change Your Life Forever, I’ll Show You How To Skip The Hard Part of 
Becoming Successful... And, Overnight, Become A Peak Performer Guaranteed! 

To find out more about The Zufelt Experience and how it can change your 
life [click here]. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



3 3 
Identifying Your 
Core Desires 

There is only one success—to be able to spend 
your life in your own way. 

—CHRISTOPHER MORLEY 

C
C
ore Desires are those things you have your heart set on—what 
you want to be, have, or do most. One might think that identifying 
these Core Desires would be easy, but people often tell me, “I don’t 
know what I want, please help me.” This dilemma affects people of all age 
groups and crosses all political, social, and economic lines. People tell me 
that they don’t know what they want to be, have, or do when they “grow 
up.” They are still searching. 

NO SENSE OF OBLIGATION 

Core Desires aren’t objectives imposed on you by others. They aren’t 
“shoulds” or “ought-tos.” Core Desires are those things you want with all 
your heart. They are deep, intense, and powerful longings. They are persistent, 
ever-demanding, heartfelt hungers or yearnings that pierce you to 
the very core. One easy way to identify them is that they are always tied to 
a strong emotion in your heart—which is the reason anything in your life 
gets done at a high level of success, satisfaction, and fun. The Conquering 

41 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



42 . The DNA of Success 

“The hand will not 
reach for what the 
heart does not long 
for.” 

—Old Welsh proverb 

Force is the only force strong enough to sustain the 
persistent effort and focus necessary to realize your 
Core Desires. 

However, people often do things because they 
feel they have to, ought to, or should, not because they 
truly want to. It could be because they feel a duty or 

obligation or because they fear punishment, ostracism, or disapproval. 

Your life is too precious, and your sojourn here on earth too short, to 
waste your time and effort on things that are not rewarding and fulfilling. 
Yes, at times you must “do your duty” with family, friends, employers, and 
country-but duty is pleasure when it aligns with desire. 

We will always encounter some “have-tos” on our way to our “wanttos”—
our Core Desires. That’s a fact. Some duties may be unpleasant, difficult, 
expensive, or even painful. But you won’t mind doing them if you 
are getting where you want to go. 

If your heart is set on getting a college degree, you will have to take 
some courses you don’t like. If you want to get into shape, you will have 
to exercise. If you want to lose weight, you will have to change your 
diet. If you want to own your own business, you will have to take certain 
risks. However, you won’t mind the “have-tos” while pursuing your Core 
Desires because the rewards far exceed the price to be paid. 

When the “have-tos” aren’t getting you to your Core Desires, your life 
is less fulfilling. It may even be miserable. Only when you are pursuing 
your Core Desires—those things that inspire you and bring you joy—will 
you unleash the powerful Conquering Force within you. You will experience 
profound joy, peace, balance, serenity, and happiness. As you pursue 
the desires of your heart, you will be happier. 

What makes work work? When you don’t like it. When you love doing 
something, even if it is physically or emotionally demanding, you don’t 
mind the effort required; in fact, you may call it fun. 

To experience a life full of enjoyable activities, day in and day out, you 
must know what you really desire. If you think you want something, but deep 
down at the core that’s not really what you want, you will never attain it. 

WHAT DOES YOUR HEART DESIRE? 


Do you know what you desire most in your heart? 
Do you have a sense of what it will take to realize those desires? Are 


http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Identifying Your Core Desires 

.


you willing to pay the price? 

For example, suppose you want to become a certified public accountant. 
You know that you need to complete a course of study as well as 
pass certain tests to realize this desire. Now you need to ask, “Am I smart 
enough to learn what I need to know? Do I believe that the knowledge I 
need already exists somewhere in a class, a course, a book, a seminar, a 
mentor, or on the Internet?” If you answer these questions with a confident 
yes, you clearly have the ability to achieve your desire to become a CPA. 
Next, you will need to put your ability to learn anything together with the 
information that already exists. The catalyst for all this comes from your 
Core Desires. If you have had a goal for months or years and haven’t 
learned what it takes to make it happen—let alone started working toward 
it—it is not a Core Desire. 

Drilling down to your Core Desires and exposing them to the light of 
day can be, at least until you get the hang of it, a little difficult and emotionally 
frustrating because you are not used to dealing with your feelings 
at the core level. So I have designed a measurement device to help you 
identify your Core Desires. This simple assessment tool serves as a guide 
to finding and knowing your heart’s desires—it causes you to reflect on 
everything you would like to have, do, experience, become, or achieve in 
many areas of your life. To help you assess the relative intensity of those 
desires, I have also designed the Core Desire Scale. 

A GAME OF QUESTIONS 

Identifying your Core Desires can be as easy as honestly answering these 
two Core Desire Search Questions: 

1. What would I like to have that I don’t have now? 
You might ask this question to help you uncover your Core Desires 
in different areas of your life, such as family relationships, finances, self-
image, social relationships, mental self, and spiritual self. This list isn’t 
all-inclusive, but it illustrates areas in which identifying your Core Desires 
could prove beneficial. 

With this central question in mind, try answering these questions to 
learn what you truly desire most: 

. What would I love to do if I had no obligations? If only I had 
more time? 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



44 
. The DNA of Success 

. 
What makes me very happy? What makes me laugh? 

. 
What tugs at my heart or stirs my emotions? What am I pining 

away for? 

. 
What would I love to do to help others? 

. 
What characteristics would I like to have or strengthen? What do I 

want with or from my spouse and children? What do I want with or 

from others? 

. 
What do my best friend and I do for fun? 

. 
What did I used to do that I just can’t do now? 

. 
If I didn’t have to worry about money, what would I do? 

Each of these questions will elicit strong responses—but not all of 
them are Core Desires. Ask this next question about each desire you have 
just identified to narrow the field: 

2. 
If I had that, was that, or could do that, what would it give me and 
how would it make me feel? 
Asking this second question helps you get past superficial wants and 
wishes and helps you see what difference this desire, once fulfilled, might 
make in your life. But your search is not over; you must now measure the 
strength of these desires. 

THE CORE DESIRE SCALE 

You must be very sensitive to the intensity of your emotional responses 
to each of the Search Questions. This sensitivity will help you accurately 
measure the intensity of your desires. Intensity is everything as it relates 
to the achievement of your Core Desires. 

What a difference a degree or two of intensity can make in the results 
you achieve for your efforts! If you want to cook some vegetables or 
power a steam locomotive, you must heat the water to 212oF to make the 
water boil—211oF is very close, but it won’t do. Only when the temperature 
reaches 212oF will the water begin to boil, bringing the results you 
want. If the temperature is between 95oF and 106oF, then the water is only 
lukewarm. 

The seismograph, or Richter scale, measures the magnitude of an 
earthquake. The scale measures magnitudes of 0 to 10. Why is the difference 
between earthquakes measuring 5 and 7 on the Richter scale so 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Identifying Your Core Desires 

.


dramatic? Because each number on the scale represents an earthquake ten 
times stronger than the number just beneath it. An earthquake registering 
a 7 on the Richter scale is ten times more powerful and ten times more 
destructive than one registering a 6. Imagine the power of the most powerful 
earthquake ever recorded—an 8.9 on the scale. 

Just as the Richter scale measures an earthquake’s intensity, so must 
you assess the intensity of your desires, feelings, and emotions by using 
the Core Desire Scale, which has a range from 1 to 100: 

1 to 20: whims, passing fancies, wishes, gratifications, momentary 
pleasures, and dislikes 

20 to 40: shoulds, oughts, duties, obligations, assignments, and extrinsic 
motivation 

40 to 60: moderate-intensity desires, wants, interests, and needs 60 to 

80: recurring desires, growing intensity, strong mind-sets, and a sense of 
duty 
80 to 99: Steady desire; relevant, important initiatives; strong interest 
and motivation. 

100: high intensity, relevancy, immediacy, heartfelt, passionate, and 
dead earnest. These are Core Desires. 
The things you hate and would never do in a million years are 1s on 
the Core Desire Scale. Things that you are sort of interested in and may 
like to have—anything about which you feel halfhearted or not totally 
committed—are somewhere between 40 and 80 on the scale. These are 
like 5s on the Richter scale. Core Desires are always 100s. 

The 100s on the Core Desire Scale are like the 10s on the Richter 
scale—far more powerful than a want or a wish. A 100 is infinitely more 
powerful than a 90 on the scale. When you pursue desires that fall below 
90 and encounter the inevitable problems and barriers, you will find that 
you don’t have the ability, or the drive, to move past them. You will get 
discouraged, give up, and hang negative labels on yourself. A 90 may get 
you 90 percent of the way there, but any desire that is not 100 will not have 
the ability to unleash your full internal power—the Conquering Force. 

These desires that measure 100 are the source of your undying enthusiasm 
and discipline. They are the only desires that will provide you with 
the persistence, and ability, to overcome any and all obstacles. The intensity 
of these Core Desires will breathe life into your project, your family, 
your plan, your religion, your business, and your life. 

Once you gain the skill of recognizing your 100s on the Core Desire 
Scale, you won’t have to go through the search questions and scale exercise 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



46 
. The DNA of Success 

again, but sometimes you will have to repeat the search questions several 
times to get to your Core Desires. It’s like drilling through layers of sediment 
to reach bedrock. You may hit bedrock right away, or it may take 
several tries. How quickly and accurately you identify your Core Desires 
depends solely on how quickly you get out of your head and into your 
heart. 

THREE EXAMPLES 

1. 
In the financial area of your life, what would you like to have that you 
don’t have now? 
If you answer, “To be financially independent,” this may rate an 80 
on the scale, but it is not your Core Desire. Now ask yourself the Search 
Question: “If I were financially independent, what would that give me that 
I don’t have now?” You may answer, “It would give me the freedom to do 
what I please.” 

Using the Search Question again, ask yourself, “If I were free to do as 
I please, what would that freedom look like? What would that give me that 
I don’t have now?” This is where people get stuck. Often they have a hard 
time clearly defining their answer, so they repeat themselves. 

If you find yourself getting stuck, just ask the question in a different 
way: “If I were financially free, what would that give me that I want but 
don’t have? What feelings would that give me?” 

You may say, “Oh, I know! I could spend more time with my family!” 
Or “I could quit working at a job I hate.” These emotional responses 
are your Core Desires. These are the 100s, and you should only spend 
your time and energy pursuing desires that hit the 100 mark on your Core 
Desire Scale. 

If your answer were “If I were financially independent today, I’d be 
free from the stress and worry of not paying the bills,” you’d not be far 
from your true Core Desire. But what words jumped out at you as you 
read that last answer? Were they paying the bills or free from the stress 
and worry? 

If you chose the latter, you would be right on. However, there are many 
ways to reduce stress and spend more time with the family, even without 
being financially independent. Being financially independent would be 
nice, but what you really want is to be free from the worry, stress, or guilt 
of not being with your family as much as you would like. Knowing that 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Identifying Your Core Desires 

.


stress and worry are the real issues could give you many more options for 
achieving those Core Desires. 

It doesn’t take being financially independent to be free of guilt or 
worry. You may need more money, but just how much more money would 
it take? You’d be surprised by what saving two hundred dollars a week— 
or month—would do. It might take some aggressive budgeting or reducing 
your car payments by selling your second car. Just changing your attitude 
can rid you of heaps of worry and stress. 

2. 
In your social life, what would you like to have that you’re not getting 
now? 
You may answer, “I just love helping others, and I’d love to do that 
more.” Again, this may be a 90 on your scale, but it is not your Core 
Desire. Ask yourself, “If I were able to help others more, what would that 
give me or make me feel that I am not getting or feeling now?” You may 
answer, “It makes me feel happy.” Try asking the question again, phrasing 
it differently: “Why do I love helping others? What other feelings do I 
have when I am helping others?” 

Keep digging, and keep asking the Search Question. You may find 
your answer with “I love helping others and putting smiles on their faces” 
or “helping others makes me feel good.” Maybe even “I love the positive 
feedback I receive.” All of these may be high on your scale, maybe even 
90s, but they are not your Core Desire. 

Ask yourself the Search Question this way: “Why do I love the positive 
feedback?” Or “Why does it make me feel good?” When you answer, 
“It makes me feel valuable, important, or appreciated,” these are the real 
Core Desires. 

Often people who don’t feel valuable or appreciated seek ways to 
meet those desires by helping others. No wonder they want to do it more: 
the real Core Desire is to feel needed by others. This is a definite 100 on 
the Core Desire Scale. 

3. 
In the area of self-esteem and self-image, what would you like to have 
in your life that you don’t have now? 
You may say, “I’d like to be more confident around people.” 

Though this may be true, it is not a Core Desire. 

Ask the Search Question, “If I were more confident around people, 
what would that bring me that I am not currently getting in my life?” 
You answer, “I would be willing to speak up more and have my opinions 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



48 . The DNA of Success 

heard.” By continuing to ask the Search Question, you are getting closer 
to identifying your true Core Desire. 

Keep asking yourself the question: “If I were willing to speak up and 
have my opinions heard, what would that give me that I don’t have now?” 
You may say, “I wouldn’t feel like I’d let others or myself down by not 
speaking my mind.” You’re getting higher on the scale, but you’re not 
quite at 100. 

“How do I feel when my opinions are not heard or when I am put 
down?” You may answer, “I feel bad and unimportant—like my opinions 
don’t matter.” These are strong emotions and evidence that you are on the 
right track. 

When you ask the question “To whom do I want my opinions to matter 
most?” you may answer, “My spouse. Having my thoughts and feelings 
heard and validated by my spouse is very important to me.” You have 
found your 100, the thing that matters most. 

This desire has a lot to do with having a safe, uplifting, and intimate 
relationship and little to do with self-confidence. If your focus is on confidence, 
you have set the wrong goal. All your pursuits of confidence probably 
won’t get you the validation you want from your partner. 

This validation is gained much faster once you realize that confidence 
is not your Core Desire, but the need to have a healthy, happy, personally 
validating, I-feel-important relationship with your spouse. Many people 
are very confident in their work but feel deprived in their marriage or other 
personal relationships. 

You may have to ask the question “If I had that, how would it make me 
feel?” several times or several ways until you’ve drilled down to the core 
and discovered your Core Desire. As you learn to become aware of your 
true feelings on any subject or issue, this exercise will become second 
nature. You are then in a position to live an authentic life . 

Warren Bennis, distinguished professor of business 
administration, University of Southern California and author 
of On Becoming a Leader 

“I believe in self-invention as an exercise of the imagination. That’s basically 
how we get to know ourselves. People who can’t invent and reinvent 
themselves must be content with borrowed postures and secondhand 
ideas, fitting in instead of standing out. Inventing oneself is the opposite 
of accepting the roles we were brought up to play. To be authentic is literally 
to be your own author, to discover your native energies and desires, 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Identifying Your Core Desires 

.


and then to find your own way of acting on them. When you’ve done that, 
you are not existing simply to live up to an image posited by the culture, 
family tradition, or some other authority. When you write your own life, 
you play the game that is natural for you to play. You keep covenant with 
your own promise.” 

Bennis cites studies that underscore the benefits of self-invention. 
First, studies show that middle-aged men tend to change careers after suffering 
heart attacks. Faced with their own mortality, these men realize that 
what they’ve been doing and what they’ve invested their lives in are not 
accurate reflections of their real needs and desires. 

Another study indicates that what determines satisfaction in men past 
middle age is the degree to which they acted upon their youthful dreams. 
It’s not whether they achieve their dreams but the honest pursuit of them 
that counts. The spiritual dimension in creative effort comes from that 
honest pursuit. 

Women, too, are happier when they “invent” themselves rather than simply 
accepting without question the roles they have been brought up to play. 
Historically, remaining single has been a way for most women to invent 
themselves. Changing times have meant changes in relationships, too. 

Dave Thomas, founder of Wendy’s, Old-Fashioned 
Hamburger Restaurants 

“Excellence in anyone little thing is hard enough. Know what motivates 
you and prove to yourself that this motivation is honest and worthwhile. 
If you do it for praise, you are likely to shortchange yourself in the end. 
Don’t allow people’s opinions about you to sidetrack you. Just be yourself, 
and you’ll be much happier. Inside yourself, you have to have a clear 
understanding of where you want to go and confidence in your ability to 
get there.” 

Oprah Winfrey 

“Be who you really are. Life is just about having everyday experiences, 
and these experiences teach you, moment by moment, who you really are. 
Every experience in life teaches you more fully how to be who you really 
are. For a long time, I wanted to be somebody else. Growing up I didn’t 
have a lot of role models. I was born in 1954. The only Black person on 
TV then was Buckwheat. I was ten years old before I saw Diana Ross on 
the Ed Sullivan Show with the Supremes, and I said, “I want to be like 
her.” It took me a long time to realize I was never going to have Diana 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



50 . The DNA of Success 

Ross’s thighs, no matter how many diets I went on. I came to realize that 
I could only be me—not Diana Ross or Barbara Walters. Through a series 
of mistakes, I learned I could be a much better Oprah than I could be a 
Barbara. I allowed Barbara to be a mentor for me, as she always has been, 
and I decided then to try to pursue the idea of being myself. I had to recognize 
that instinct or inner voice that told me, ‘You need to find a way to 
answer to your own truth.’ “ 

Christopher Reeve 

“Some people really don’t know what they want to be. When they are 
asked, ‘What are you going to do with your life?’ they have the honesty to 
answer, ‘I really don’t know.’ Such honesty can lead to very rewarding and 
profound discoveries about yourself.” 

THREE CASE STUDIES 

Uncovering your Core Desires and unleashing your Conquering Force 
will cause you to live a fuller, happier, and more successful life. As you 
learn to identify, and pursue, your Core Desires, you may find yourself in 
any of these three situations. 

Right on the Money 

Once, a vice president of a large insurance company came to me and asked 
for my help. Although he was earning more than enough money, he wasn’t 
happy in his job. He had been at it for twenty-two years and had just grown 
tired of it. He wanted something else. When I asked him what else he’d like 
to do, he replied, without emotion, “I’ve been looking at real estate and 
investments because I know people who have succeeded in those areas.” 

When he admitted that he had chosen those two professions because 
he had seen others do well in them, I told him, “You might want to consider 
another option. There’s no emotion at all in your voice. Your head is 
talking, not your heart, and these options don’t reflect your Core Desire.” 

“Well, then,” he said, “I guess I just don’t know what I really want 
to do.” 

“What gets you all jazzed up and excited?” 

Suddenly his face lit up as he said, “My heart starts to pound when I 
think about doing this one thing because it’s so exciting to me.” Before 
telling me what this one thing was, he added, “But I don’t see how I can 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Identifying Your Core Desires 

.


continue to make a good living by doing it.” 

