Timothy Walter "Tim" Burton[1] (born August 25, 1958) is an American film director, film producer, writer and artist. He is famous for dark, quirky-themed movies such as Beetlejuice, Edward Scissorhands, The Nightmare Before Christmas, Ed Wood, Sleepy Hollow, Corpse Bride and Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street, and for blockbusters such as Pee-wee's Big Adventure, Batman, Batman Returns, Planet of the Apes, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Alice in Wonderland, his most recent film, that was the second highest-grossing film of 2010 as well as the ninth highest-grossing film of all time.[2] Among Burton's many collaborators are Johnny Depp, who became a close friend since their first film together, musician Danny Elfman (who has composed for all but five of the films Burton has directed and/or produced) and domestic partner Helena Bonham Carter. He also wrote and illustrated the poetry book The Melancholy Death of Oyster Boy & Other Stories, published in 1997, and a compilation of his drawings, entitled The Art of Tim Burton, was released in 2009.

Burton has directed 14 films as of 2010, and has produced 10 as of 2009. His next films are an adaptation of the soap opera Dark Shadows, scheduled to be released on May 11, 2012,[3] and a remake of his 1984 short, Frankenweenie, scheduled to be released on October 5, 2012.[4]
Burton was born in 1958, in the city of Burbank, California, to Jean Burton (née Erickson), the owner of a cat-themed gift shop, and Bill Burton, a former minor league baseball player who would later work for the Burbank Park and Recreation Department.[5][6] As a young man, Burton would make short films in his backyard on Evergreen Street using crude stop motion animation techniques or shoot them on 8 mm film without sound. (One of his most famous juvenile films is The Island of Doctor Agor, that he made when he was 13 years old.) Burton studied at the Burbank High School, but he was not a particularly good student. He was a very introspective person, and found his pleasure in painting, drawing and watching movies. His future work would be heavily influenced by the works by Edgar Allan Poe he read, and the horror and science fiction films he watched, such as Godzilla, the films made by Hammer Film Productions, the works of Ray Harryhausen and Vincent Price.

After graduating from Burbank High School with Jeff Riekenberg, Burton attended the California Institute of the Arts to study character animation. Some of his classmates were John Lasseter, Brad Bird, John Musker and Henry Selick. (In the future, Selick and Burton would work together in The Nightmare Before Christmas and James and the Giant Peach.)

As a student in CalArts, Burton made the shorts Stalk of the Celery Monster and King and Octopus.[7] They remain only in fragments today.
Burton graduated from CalArts in 1979. The success of his short film Stalk of the Celery Monster attracted the attention of the Walt Disney Animation Studios, who offered young Burton an animator's apprenticeship at their studio. He worked as an animator, storyboard artist and conceptual artist in films such as The Fox and the Hound, The Black Cauldron and Tron. However, Burton's personal style clashed with Disney's own standards, and he longed to work on solo projects.

While at Disney in 1982, Burton made his first short, Vincent, a six minute black and white stop motion film based on a poem written by the filmmaker, and depicting a young boy who fantasizes that he is his (and Burton's) hero Vincent Price, with Price himself providing narration. The film was produced by Rick Heinrichs, whom Burton had befriended while working in the concept art department at Disney. The film was shown at the Chicago Film Festival and released, alongside the teen drama Tex, for two weeks in one Los Angeles cinema. This was followed by Burton's first live-action production Hansel and Gretel, a Japanese-themed adaptation of the Brothers Grimm fairy tale for the Disney Channel, which climaxes in a kung-fu fight between Hansel and Gretel and the witch. Having aired once at 10:30 pm on Halloween 1983 and promptly shelved, prints of the film are extremely difficult to locate, which contributes to the rumor that this project does not exist. (In 2009, the short went on display in the Museum of Modern Art.)

Burton's next live-action short, Frankenweenie, was released in 1984. It tells the story of a young boy who tries to revive his dog after it is run over by a car. Filmed in black-and-white, it stars Barret Oliver, Shelley Duvall (with whom he would work again in 1986, directing an episode of her Faerie Tale Theatre) and Daniel Stern. After Frankenweenie was completed, Disney fired Burton, under the pretext of him spending the company's resources on doing a film that would be too dark and scary for children to see.

Pursuing then an opportunity to make a full-length film, he was approached by Griffin Dunne to direct the black comedy film After Hours. However, after Martin Scorsese's project The Last Temptation of Christ was cancelled, he showed an interest on directing it, and Burton bowed out in respect for Scorsese.
Not long after, actor Paul Reubens saw Frankenweenie and chose Burton to direct the cinematic spin-off of his popular character Pee-wee Herman. Pee-wee Herman gained mainstream popularity with a successful stage show at the Roxy which was later turned into an HBO special. The film, Pee-wee's Big Adventure (1985), was made on a budget of $8 million and grossed more than $40 million at the box office. Burton, a fan of the eccentric musical group Oingo Boingo, asked songwriter Danny Elfman to provide the music for the film. Since then, Elfman has provided the score for all but five of the films Burton has directed and/or produced, those exceptions being Cabin Boy, Ed Wood, James and the Giant Peach, Batman Forever and Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street.
After directing episodes for the revitalized TV series Alfred Hitchcock Presents and Shelley Duvall's Faerie Tale Theatre, Burton received his next big project: Beetlejuice (1988), a supernatural comedy horror about a young couple forced to cope with life after death, as well as a family of pretentious yuppies invading their treasured New England home including their teenage daughter Lydia (Winona Ryder) whose obsession with death allows her to see them. Starring Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis, and featuring Michael Keaton as the obnoxious bio-exorcist Betelgeuse, the film grossed $80 million on a relatively low budget and won an Academy Award for Best Makeup. It would be converted into a cartoon of the same name, with Burton playing a role as executive producer, that ran on ABC and later Fox.
Burton's ability to produce hits with low budgets impressed studio executives, and he received his first big budget film, Batman. The production was plagued with problems. Burton repeatedly clashed with the film's producers, Jon Peters and Peter Guber, but the most notable debacle involved casting. For the title role, Burton chose to cast Michael Keaton as Batman following their previous collaboration in Beetlejuice, despite Keaton's average physique, inexperience with action films, and reputation as a comic actor. Although Burton won in the end, the furor over the casting provoked enormous fan animosity, to the extent that Warner Brothers' share price slumped.[citation needed] Burton had considered it ridiculous to cast a bulked-up he-man as Batman, insisting that the Caped Crusader should be an ordinary (albeit fabulously wealthy) man who dressed up in an elaborate bat costume to frighten criminals. Burton cast Jack Nicholson as The Joker (Tim Curry being his second choice) in a move that helped assuage fans' fears, as well as attracting older audiences not as interested in a superhero film.[citation needed]

When the film opened in June 1989, it was backed by the biggest marketing and merchandising campaign in film history at the time, and became one of the biggest box office hits of all time, grossing well over US$250 million in the U.S. alone and $400 million worldwide (numbers not adjusted for inflation) and earning critical acclaim for the performances of both Keaton and Nicholson, as well as the film's production aspects, which won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction. The success of the film helped establish Burton as a profitable director, and it also proved to be a huge influence on future superhero films, which eschewed the bright, all-American heroism of Richard Donner's Superman for a grimmer, more realistic look and characters with more psychological depth. It also became a major inspiration for the successful 1990s cartoon Batman: The Animated Series, in as much as the darkness of the picture and its sequel allowed for a darker Batman on television.

Burton claimed that The Killing Joke was a major influence on his film adaptation of Batman:

    "I was never a giant comic book fan, but I've always loved the image of Batman and The Joker. The reason I've never been a comic book fan—and I think it started when I was a child—is because I could never tell which box I was supposed to read. I don't know if it was dyslexia or whatever, but that's why I loved The Killing Joke, because for the first time I could tell which one to read. It's my favorite. It's the first comic I've ever loved. And the success of those graphic novels made our ideas more acceptable."[8]
Edward Scissorhands
Main article: Edward Scissorhands

In 1990, Burton co-wrote (with Caroline Thompson) and directed Edward Scissorhands, re-uniting with Winona Ryder from Beetlejuice. His friend Johnny Depp, a teen idol at the end of the 1980s due primarily to his work on the hit TV series 21 Jump Street, was cast in the title role of Edward, who was the creation of an eccentric and old-fashioned inventor (played by Vincent Price in one of his last screen appearances). Edward looked human, but was left with scissors in the place of hands due to the untimely death of his creator. Set in suburbia (the film was shot in Lutz, Florida), the film is largely seen as Burton's autobiography of his own childhood in the suburb of Burbank. Price at one point is said to have remarked, "Tim is Edward." Depp wrote a similar comment in the foreword to Mark Salisbury's book, Burton on Burton, regarding his first meeting with Burton over the casting of the film. Edward is considered Burton's best movie by many critics.[who?] Following this collaboration with Burton, Depp starred in Ed Wood, Sleepy Hollow, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Corpse Bride, Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street, Alice in Wonderland and Dark Shadows.

In 2004, Matthew Bourne came to Burton with the idea to turn the story of Edward into a ballet. In 2005, the ballet first aired. It has now toured the UK, the U.S., Canada, Australia and parts of Europe.
Batman Returns
Main article: Batman Returns
I drove with great care the rest of the way to the turning for Vixen Hill, and in spite of that, the tires swerved
in a rut, and Sophie woke up and started to cry again. She was hungry and very, very tired. I was so grateful
that Inspector Rother hadn’t seen her in the darkness.
Sergeant Larimore had had her best interests at heart, but he hadn’t thought it through any more than I
had when I began to search for Sophie.
We pulled up in front of the door to the hall, and I turned off the motor.
In the quiet that followed, Sophie sniffed and looked at me as if to ask why we were stopping. “C’est votre
maison, maintenant, chérie. Votre nouvelle maison.”
This is your home now, dear one. Your new home.
She turned to look up at the imposing house before her, tears still streaking her cheeks, and then held up
her arms to me to take her out of the motorcar.
Keeping her well wrapped against the cold, I carried her to the door and lifted the knocker. But Daisy
must have heard the motorcar arrive, because she opened the door at once.
“Oh, Miss, we was so worried!”
“I’m sorry, Daisy. It’s a long story. Is—everyone all right?”
“Yes, Miss. It was you we was worried about.” She peered into the shadows at the bundle I was carrying.
“Is that a baby?”
“A child,” I said, “hungry and tired and frightened.”
“I’ve looked after my brothers and sisters,” she said. “I can manage. But where did she come from?” She
reached for Sophie, who pulled away.
“I’ll take her down to the kitchens, Daisy. Will you lead the way?”
There was no one in the hall as we entered. Daisy had been building up the fire when I knocked, her tongs
lying on the carpet, an extra log in the wood box for the evening. She hastily put the tongs back where she’d
found them, and, dusting her hands, she went through the door into the passage.
“The family is dressing for dinner,” she said. “Should I send for Mrs. Matthew?”
“Later, perhaps.”
We made it to the kitchen without meeting anyone. Around me sat the array of dishes that would be taken
to the sitting room in another quarter of an hour. Onions baked in a cream sauce, a side dish of greens, a
small platter of roasted chicken and potatoes. I felt my own empty stomach growl at the sight.
We put Sophie down in one of the wooden chairs, and Daisy found milk for her in the pantry, as well as a
scone that had been left over from tea.
Sophie sat on my lap and drank the milk, then nibbled at the scone, her gaze sweeping the kitchen and
then scanning Daisy’s face. I expect she had never seen so much food or been in a room quite so warm.
After a moment she got down and held out the cup to be filled again, and still nibbling at the scone, she
considered me.
I smiled. “Je m’appelle Bess,” I said softly. I call myself Bess.
Daisy stared. “What was that you said, Miss?”
“It’s French—” I could have bitten my tongue. But I was tired, it had been over twenty-four hours since I’d
slept, and I’d driven miles.
Daisy’s eyes grew wide. “This isn’t the little girl that was spoken of in the drawing room before the
Lieutenant was killed?” She studied the small, tear-streaked face. “My good lord, she does look like Miss
Juliana, in that portrait.”
“How did you hear about her?” I asked sharply. “You weren’t in the drawing room that night.”
“No, Miss, but the lad who brings our order from the greengrocer’s is brother to the cook at Dr. Tilton’s
house, and she overheard them talking about the child. They said it was Mr. Roger’s. Is that true?”
“You’ll have to ask him,” I said. “Will you make up a little porridge, or a pudding?”
“Yes, Miss, and there’s an extra potato left in the pot. I can make up a little soup with the broth from the
chicken.”
“Yes, that will do well.” I held out my arms to Sophie, and after a moment she came to them, wary and
uncertain. “I’ll take her to my room for now. And I’d rather you didn’t say anything until after—”
The door to the kitchen swung open, and Lydia came in. “Was there someone at the door—” She too
broke off in midsentence.
“Bess! Where on earth have you been? “And then she saw Sophie, whose face had crumpled at the sight
of the newcomer, and I remembered that the nuns had said that there were few visitors who saw the
children.
“Is that—oh, Bess, where did you find her? How?” She came around to the other side of the table. “Dear
God,” she whispered as she saw Sophie clearly. “She’s Roger’s daughter. She must be.”
“I don’t know whose child she is,” I said quickly. “And she’s here only for a very short time. The nuns in
France—”
“I don’t care about the nuns,” Lydia said, and dropped to her knees before Sophie. “Can she understand
us?”
“She speaks only French,” I said.
To my surprise, Lydia began to speak to Sophie in French that was far better than mine. I hadn’t known
she’d studied the language, much less spoke it so well.
For a moment Sophie leaned back against me, staring at Lydia. But the accent was familiar enough that
after a moment Sophie began to reply. Tentative at first, and then more readily.
Lydia asked her name and where she was from, how old she was—the sort of questions an adult usually
puts to a child.
I said, “Where did you learn to speak French?”
She answered, never taking her eyes from Sophie, “When I was fourteen, we had a French mistress at
our school. I won a prize for the best accent.”
“She’s very tired,” I told Lydia. “I was just about to take her to my room. She isn’t used to so many
strangers at once.”
“No, I want her in my room. There’s Davis’s cat, she’ll like Bluebell, and I can get to know her.” She got up
from her knees and flung her arms around me. “Bess, you’re wonderful. I’m so grateful. You can’t know how
grateful.”
“She isn’t yours,” I insisted. “She must go back to France as soon as I can return her to the convent. The
nuns will be frantic, there was a fire—”
Lydia’s face hardened. “She’s not going anywhere. She’s mine. I won’t let her be taken back to France.”
I said wearily, “You don’t have any choice, Lydia. She’s not yours. Nor is she mine. There are laws,
papers, arrangements to be made.”
“Then we’ll make them. Why should she live out a life of drudgery in a convent? Look at her, she’s the
image of Juliana. Roger is her father, he can tell the French authorities that he’s adopting her. Or whatever
they call it in France.”
“He doesn’t know she’s here. He may not want to keep her.”
“Yes, he will. She’s his flesh and blood. And I’m his wife.”
There was no reasoning with her. Before I could say anything else, make any stronger arguments, she
had lifted Sophie into her arms, asking the child if she wanted to see the cat.
Sophie’s tired face brightened, and she nodded.
“See?” Lydia said to me over her shoulder. “She’s happy with me.”
“She’s hungry, Lydia. I’ve asked Daisy to make her a light supper after the family has dined.”
“That’s a lovely idea. Daisy, ask Molly to bring a tray to my room.” She corrected herself. “The room I’m
using. And some bedding, please. Pillows, a quilt or two.”
“We’ll see to it,” Daisy promised her. “But isn’t she the dearest little thing?”
And Lydia was out the door, calling over her shoulder, “Bess, please, will you tell the family I have a
headache? I won’t be dining tonight.”
And she was gone.
I didn’t know how I was to get through the dinner ahead. I debated going after Lydia and taking Sophie
away from her. But that would only serve to frighten Sophie and make her cry.
“I must hurry and change,” I said and left the room before Daisy or the cook, Mrs. Long, could ask any
more questions.
I bathed my face and hands, changed out of the uniform I had worn for nearly two days straight, and put on
the only evening dress I had with me, a dark blue one that was more practical than it was stylish.
When I came down to the drawing room ten minutes later, everyone turned to stare as I crossed the
threshold.
“I’m so sorry, Mrs. Ellis. When I went to Hartfield to take the call, I was asked to proceed at once to Dover.
There was no one I could ask to carry a message to you.”
“Why Dover?” Roger Ellis asked, suspicion darkening his eyes.
“There was a problem with one of my patients. Daisy said you’d been worried, and I apologize for that as
well.” I looked from Mrs. Ellis to Margaret and then to Gran. “As Captain Ellis can tell you, duty is not a
matter of choice.”
“We were quite concerned, especially after the situation in Hartfield. We were afraid something had
happened to you.” She went to the table by the window. “There’s a little sherry left of our trove. You look as if
you could use something to lift your spirits. Was it very bad in Dover?”
I took the sherry gratefully, feeling its burn as I swallowed it. “I drove straight there with a Major on his way
to join his regiment, and I returned, without sleep. Yes, Dover was quite trying.” While I still held the floor, I
asked, “But what were the police doing in Hartfield? I had to leave before I could discover what their interest
was in Bluebell Cottage. The constables were holding everyone back. Tonight, when I encountered
Inspector Rother on the road, he told me that they were searching for another body. But he refused to tell me
any more than that.”
“A body?” Mrs. Ellis turned to her son. “You didn’t say anything about a body.”
“It was mostly over by the time I got there,” he replied. “I told you, I asked Mr. Smyth what was going on,
and he said he wasn’t at liberty to tell me.” He turned to me. “Just where did you run into Rother?”
“There’s a track coming in from the left that meets the main track running past Vixen Hill. A mile or two
from where your lane turns to the right. He was coming from that direction.”
Roger said, “There’s the ruin of a windmill that way. Not much else.”
“And you’re sure he said a body?” Margaret asked, a frown between her eyes.
“Yes, I’m sure. I was asking him about the excitement in Hartfield. And that’s when he told me. I think he
was too angry with me for leaving to say any more than he had. My—punishment—for disappearing.”
“He’s incompetent,” Gran said. “I’d complain to the Chief Constable if I thought it would do any good.”
“It can’t be easy for him,” Margaret pointed out. “He hounds us because he doesn’t know where else to
turn and George was our houseguest.”
Before I could make Lydia’s excuses, Daisy came to the door to announce dinner. Mrs. Ellis said, “We’re
waiting for Lydia. She hasn’t come down.”
Daisy flicked a glance in my direction then said, “She has a headache, ma’am, and doesn’t feel up to
having dinner.”
“Then I should go up to her,” Mrs. Ellis said.
Daisy hastily improvised. “I think she’s sleeping. She’s asked for a tray later.”
“Well, then,” Gran said, “there’s no reason to let our own dinner spoil.”
She led the way into the dining room, and as we were taking our places, I saw Roger Ellis watching me
with wary eyes.
We didn’t linger over dinner. And when everyone went to the hall to have our tea, Roger Ellis caught my
arm and held me back.
We stood there in the dining room, the remains of dinner on the table behind us, and waited until the
others were out of earshot.
“What took you to Dover?” he asked in a low voice. “It wasn’t duty. They wouldn’t summon a nursing sister
from Sussex to deal with a patient in Kent.”
“I actually did meet a former patient and got him transferred back to the Base Hospital in Rouen.” I pulled
my arm from his grasp.
“Rouen? What was he doing in Dover?”
“He’d been badly burned in a fire, and was out of his head. They put him on the ship by mistake.”
“The devil they did! Why did you go to Dover?”
I took a deep breath. He would learn about Sophie soon enough.
“It’s true. As far as it goes. But the fire was in Rouen, a street of houses burning. In one of them lived a
handful of dispossessed nuns caring for a number of French orphans. Your daughter was among them.
Thank God the children were rescued, and the man who brought her out of the fire knew I’d been searching
for such a child. He brought her to me. Only I didn’t know that when I drove to Kent. I only knew that a man I’d
treated in France was in Dover without proper papers and in a great deal of trouble. It wasn’t until I’d got
there that he told me the rest of the story.”
“You knew when I met you in Rouen where she was. I suspected it then. I know it now. Why did you lie to
me?” He was very angry.
“I didn’t lie. I didn’t feel it was the right time to tell you the whole truth. What could you have done? Nothing.
Which is all I was able to do. And—to be perfectly honest—I didn’t know what you intended to do when you
found Sophie.”
“Did you believe I would harm her? I only wanted to pay for her upkeep, to give her a chance at a decent
life.”
“But not to bring her to England.”
“Where is this child now?”
I hesitated. “Here. At Vixen Hill. I didn’t know where else to take her, and I’d already been away from
Sussex too long. But I must find a way to return her to France as soon as possible. The nuns will think she’s
dead in the fire. Or worse. That’s not right. The Sergeant meant well, he thought he was doing what was
best. But he shouldn’t have taken her away. The nuns are the only family she’s ever known. And the other
children are her family—”
He cut me short, his voice harsh. “Is she in your room?”
“No. Lydia came into the kitchen when I was trying to feed her and comfort her. She took her to the room
above the hall.”
He swore then, and started for the stairs. I went quickly after him, and said, “Whatever you want to say to
me or to your wife, you will not frighten that child. Do you hear me?”
“I don’t frighten children.”
But I thought in the mood he was in, he might not remember Sophie. And so I followed him.
When we came to the room Lydia had taken over, he knocked, and then without waiting for an invitation to
enter, he opened the door and walked in.
Lydia, startled, looked at him and then her gaze slid to me. “You told him,” she accused.
Beside her on the cushions spread about the floor, the cat and the child were curled up asleep. She
moved away from them and stood up to face her husband.
He didn’t look at Sophie. His eyes were on his wife. “Her father’s name is Hebert. She is not my child.”
“You’ve only to look at her to know she is,” Lydia retorted. “Whatever name you used.”
“He was a French officer. He died in the fighting six months before she was born. Her mother died of
childbed fever.”
Lydia shook her head. “You can’t deny her, Roger. It would be cruel to try.”
“You can’t keep her,” he said doggedly. “Ask Bess, if you don’t believe me.”
“She’s here. And she’ll stay with me. I don’t care about French law or the nuns or anything else.”
“Lydia,” I began, but she shook her head a second time.
“No, I don’t want to hear it. Roger made his choice. I’ve made mine. I’ll have a child now. It’s what I wanted
from the beginning. And you needn’t worry about me anymore.”
“How will you explain her to the world, Lydia?” I asked. “You must think about this practically, not
emotionally. Will you let everyone in Ashdown Forest point her out as Roger’s love child? She’ll be under
that cloud for the rest of her life, if you aren’t careful. She’s not yours. She must go back to France. If Roger
wants her, he can go through the proper procedures. I’ll take her back as soon as possible.”
“You won’t. I won’t let you. Now go away, both of you. I’ve nothing more to say.” And she turned her back
on us, walking to the window and looking out into the darkness.
Roger tried to argue with her, to no avail. And then she said, suddenly turning toward us, “There’s a
motorcar coming up the lane. I expect it must be the police.”
She turned toward the bed, intent on taking up the sleeping child and going somewhere with her.
I said, “Lydia, stop! The police don’t know anything about this. They’ve come because there was another
murder, not for Sophie.”
She hesitated. “You’re lying to me.”
“No. There’s no way they could have discovered anything about her. Even if the French police are
searching everywhere, there’s nothing to lead them to Sussex.”
Roger looked at me. “You have more explaining to do,” he said, and then turned and went out of the room.
I could hear his steps on the stairs.
Lydia hovered protectively over Sophie, daring me to take her away.
I said, “Are you sure you want a child who looks so much like Juliana?”
“I don’t care what she looks like. It won’t matter.”
“But it might to your husband. Did you see? He never looked in Sophie’s direction. He doesn’t want to
know how much she looks like his sister. He doesn’t want to be reminded.”
“He’ll change his mind in time. You don’t know him, Bess.”
I was getting nowhere, and I could just hear the knock at the hall door.
I said, “We’ll have to deal with this later,” and followed Roger Ellis down the stairs.
When I walked into the hall, I saw that Lydia was right. Inspector Rother had just been admitted. He
crossed to the hearth and put out his hands to the blaze, saw that I had joined the others, and nodded.
“You’re all here then. Except for Mrs. Roger Ellis,” he said. “Will you please bring her down to hear what I
have to say.”
“She has a headache. I hope you will allow her to rest now,” I answered him.
“Very well. We’ve come to search Vixen Hill.”
Captain Ellis moved a little from where he stood. “I’ll know the reason why before I allow you to search my
house and upset my family.”
Inspector Rother said, “We’ve searched the Forest in every direction. The windmill, the church, the
villages, everywhere. This is the only place we haven’t been.”
Roger flicked a glance in my direction. I knew what he was thinking: Had the hue and cry gone up for
Sophie Hebert after all? Or was this police business of another sort?
But Sergeant Larimore would never have given us away, even if somehow he’d been connected to her
disappearance. I moved my head just a fraction, and Captain Ellis saw it.
He said, “That’s all well and good, Inspector. But you’ve yet to tell me why you must invade my privacy.”
“Very well,” he said grudgingly. “Dr. Tilton went out on his rounds yesterday afternoon. His last patient was
Mrs. Jenkins, who lives in Wych Cross and suffers from sciatica. He saw her, and as he was leaving, she
offered him tea, but he told her he was expected home for his own. But he never arrived. Someone
suggested he might have gone into Bluebell Cottage, which is of course empty now. And so we went there
to look for him. There was no sign that he’d been in the cottage. That’s when we began searching the
Forest.”
“He’s not here. I can give you my word on that.”
“That may well be. But this is a large house, you don’t use all the rooms these days. And the grounds are
extensive.”
Roger Ellis considered the request. “I shall give my consent with one reservation. I was just in to see my
wife, and asked Sister Crawford to give her something for her headache. She’s in the room above the hall,
here. You will not disturb her.”
“Agreed,” the Inspector said with poor grace.
He went to the door and admitted his men. Among them was Constable Bates, whom none of us could
abide. As they spread out to search, I said, “Who told you that the doctor had gone into Bluebell Cottage?”
“It was his wife,” the Inspector answered. “Mary Tilton. His mother is coming up from Eastbourne to live
closer to him, and if Bluebell Cottage was to her liking, he was prepared to make an offer for it.” He turned
and followed his men from the room.
We sat there in silence, the tea that Daisy had brought in while I was upstairs with Lydia and Roger
growing cold.
After a moment Mrs. Ellis said, “I do hope they’ll be careful and not break anything.”
“Or pocket anything,” Gran added sourly. “I don’t trust the police.”
“Why should Dr. Tilton have gone missing?” Margaret asked. “I can see that he might have been
summoned to see another patient in an emergency. But if that were true, surely he’d have sent word to his
wife?”
“One would think so,” Mrs. Ellis replied distractedly, listening to any sound from the search.
“I wish Henry was here,” Margaret said. “I’m afraid.”
“There’s no need to be frightened,” her brother told her. But I thought she’d been away from the Forest
long enough to feel differently about it.
After what seemed to be hours, the police returned.
Roger, standing by the fire, came forward to meet the Inspector.
“Are you finished?”
“All but searching the grounds.”
They left, and we could see their torches flashing as they spread out across the grounds.
Gran said, “If they were as clever as they think they are, they’d have come here before dark. Those
torches will do them no good, and we shall have them back tomorrow. Wait and see.”
And as she had prophesized, they returned at first light in the morning.
I was first down to breakfast, judging by the dishes that Daisy had set out.
When Roger Ellis came in just minutes after me, I said, “What will you do about Sophie? Have you told the
rest of your family that she’s here?”
“If I do,” he said tiredly, “there will be no hope of taking her back to France. You have put me—and that
child—in an untenable situation.”
“I realized that, the instant I saw her in Dover. But I couldn’t leave England. And there was no safe way to
return her.”
“The fool who brought her to you deserves to be taken out and shot.”
Before I could answer that, Mrs. Ellis came in. She had passed a sleepless night, her eyes dark-ringed,
her face drawn.
“They’re out there, just as Gran predicted,” she said. “The police. Surely they don’t believe we could have
harmed Dr. Tilton. It’s ridiculous.”
“They have their duty to perform,” her son told her. “I expect they rather enjoyed this one.”
“Yes, it’s so different since the war, isn’t it?” She filled her plate, then set it aside. “I don’t feel like eating
after all. How is Lydia feeling this morning?”
“I haven’t disturbed her,” he answered.
She glanced at me. After a moment she asked him, “You and Lydia will make up this quarrel, won’t you?
Whatever was said or not said, done or not done when she fled to London, surely it isn’t as important as
your marriage. God knows your father and I didn’t always see eye to eye. About many things. But we loved
each other.”
“Not enough to prevent him from killing himself over Juliana,” he retorted, then said at once, “No, I’m sorry,
that was cruel and uncalled for.”
She bit her lip. “But so true, I’m afraid. We were all devastated, my dear. You as well as the rest of us. I
don’t quite know how any of us survived. Well. I hope you and Lydia can find common ground to mend
matters.”
“I’m willing to try,” he told her, but I didn’t think he meant it.
Just then Daisy came into the dining room. “That Inspector Rother is in the hall, and he wants to see the
family.”
Mrs. Ellis rose. “I don’t think Gran is awake yet. Will you look, Daisy? And see if Miss Margaret has come
down, as well.”
Roger was already heading for the door, passing Daisy and striding down the passage toward the hall. I
waited for Mrs. Ellis and walked with her.
“I have a bad feeling about this,” she said, speaking to herself as much as to me.
“I expect he’s come to say that the second search was no more successful than the first.”
“Pray God you’re right, Bess, dear. I don’t think any of us can endure much more.”
But as soon as I saw Inspector Rother’s face, I knew she was right.
Roger Ellis was already speaking to him as we came into the room. “You will not disturb my grandmother
or my wife. What you have to say you can say to me.” He looked around as his mother came in. “I’ll deal with
this, my dear. Don’t let it distress you.”
“But I’m afraid my news will distress all of you,” the Inspector said, looking from one to the other of us. “We
have found Dr. Tilton’s body. It was lying in that culvert that runs past the barn. It’s overgrown, that’s why we
didn’t find it last night.”
Mrs. Ellis grasped the back of a chair to steady herself. “Our barn? But how did he come to be here?” she
said. “I don’t understand.”
“What happened to him?” her son was asking at the same time, his words cutting across hers.
“He was struck over the head. Murdered.” As Gran came into the room, followed by Margaret, he added
with intense anger, “One of you in this household is a murderer. Three dead men at your doorstep, for all
intents and purposes. Now what do you have to say for yourselves?”
There was a long silence as we digested his words. Then Roger Ellis said coldly, “Until you can prove
that, I shall ask you to leave my house. Do what you must do to remove the doctor’s body, and then I’ll thank
you to leave my land as well.”
Inspector Rother smiled. “I’m afraid that’s not possible. I shall require statements from each of you
regarding your whereabouts night before last. We’re waiting for Dr. Ledbetter from Groombridge. He will tell
us the hours of interest. Until then we ask that you not leave the premises. I’ll be posting a constable at the
door, meanwhile. At the moment I must go and break the news to Mrs. Tilton. You might spare a thought for
her in her loss—”
He’d been standing with his back to the door. It opened, and I heard Margaret cry out. I turned in time to
see her husband, Henry, walk through the door.
“What the hell is going on?” Henry demanded, looking from one to the other of us.
Inspector Rother said, “You were summoned days ago.”
“I know. There’s a war on, you see. I was rather busy.” He went directly to his wife, who held him as if he
were the anchor she’d been waiting for.
“Where were you these last two nights?” Inspector Rother demanded.
“In London,” Henry replied shortly. “I couldn’t leave France, and when I did, I was seconded to carry
dispatches to the War Office. My commanding officer doesn’t hold with provincial policemen disrupting his
war.”
It was said to irritate, and it hit its mark. Inspector Rother flushed.
“Nevertheless, you will give your statement to one of my constables,” he said, and then turned to the rest
of us.
“In your earlier statements, none of you reported the conversation in the drawing room that led to
Lieutenant Hughes retiring early. No one, that is, save Dr. Tilton and his wife. Even the rector and his sister
professed not to recall what led to the Lieutenant going up to his room. And by the next morning, Hughes
was dead and Davis Merrit was accused of his murder. But Davis Merrit must have known something about
that conversation. After all, Mrs. Lydia Ellis had rushed into Hartfield to speak to him on that fatal Saturday
morning, and the only conclusion to be drawn is that she was upset by events and confided in him rather
than her husband. Merrit disappeared, and again the only conclusion was that Merrit, in a fit of misplaced
gallantry, rid Mrs. Lydia Ellis of this man who had upset her. But Merrit turned up dead, and not by his own
hand, as we’d begun to suspect might be the case. And now Dr. Tilton, who might have appeared to be the
tattler to the police, is dead.” He swung around toward me. “Indeed, Dr. Tilton had mentioned that you
refused to allow him to question the Lieutenant more fully, and that you’d been ordered to accompany him to
help put Hughes to bed by Roger Ellis himself.”
“I was sent because he was too unsteady to walk alone to his room. Captain Ellis gave me no
instructions. The rector and his sister can verify that. I was acting in my capacity as a nurse, not a spy,” I
replied shortly. “And if you question Mrs. Tilton on this subject, she will tell you that that’s the truth.”
“Nevertheless, Dr. Tilton is dead. On your property, Captain. Because he failed to keep your family’s
secrets. Now I ask you to consider who among you had the greatest need to do murder.”
Mrs. Ellis stood up. Her face was pale, but her voice was steady. “It wasn’t my son,” she said. “I killed
these men.”
Gran crossed the room and stood beside her. “Don’t believe her. I did it. I can even tell you how.”
We were all shocked into silence. Then Roger Ellis said sharply, “There’s no need to defend me. I can
speak for myself.” He turned to Inspector Rother. “You’re telling us that these murders were done to keep the
world from discovering that I possibly had a love child in France. This ‘love child’ of mine, however, is the
daughter of Claudette and Gerard Hebert, both of whom are dead—the mother in childbirth, for which there
are witnesses, and the father fighting in the French Army.”
There was the ring of truth in his voice, and it was the truth. As far as it went. As he finished, he flicked a
glance in my direction, as if defying me to contradict him.
I had no intention of betraying his confidence. It would only hurt Lydia and stain Sophie’s reputation for all
time.
“What do you know about this business, Sister Crawford?”
“I have seen this child.” I heard Mrs. Ellis and Gran gasp. “And no one has tried to kill me. What’s more,
the nuns into whose care she was given called her Sophie Hebert.”
“Are you defending this man for personal reasons, Sister Crawford?”
“I am not. But if he has committed murder, it was not because of Sophie Hebert.”
He considered Roger Ellis, then said, “Thank you for being frank, sir. But it’s clear your family is not a
party to this information. That leaves them as suspects in these murders.”
“I tell you, neither my mother nor my grandmother is capable of killing anyone.”
“How much strength does it take, Captain, to slip up behind a man and strike him hard on the back of the
head, hard enough to break his skull? One blow was not sufficient for Lieutenant Hughes—he was left to
drown while he was unconscious. But practice makes perfect, does it not? A single blow dispatched the
other two victims.”
He hadn’t told us any of that. “What was the weapon?” I asked. “I thought a revolver was found by Merrit’s
head?”
“A walking stick? One might carry that without suspicion. As for the revolver, it was window dressing.”
“But you’ve taken all the walking sticks in this house. Did you find that one of them had been used as a
murder weapon?” Captain Ellis asked.
“You’re right. None of the sticks showed signs of use. But were these all the sticks that were here to start
with? I questioned the staff, and they either can’t or refuse to help me.”
“What about William Pryor?” I asked him. “At one time you thought he might know more about the death of
Lieutenant Hughes and even Davis Merrit than he was willing to admit.”
“I haven’t forgot Mr. Pryor,” he told me, and then said, “Mrs. Ellis, I’d like you to come with me.”
Roger stepped between his mother and Inspector Rother. “No. She’s had nothing to do with this
business.”
Mrs. Ellis put her hand on her son’s arm. “Let me go with him, let him question me. The sooner we
cooperate, the sooner this will be finished.”
“He’ll do his best to confuse you. I won’t have it. If he has questions, he can ask them here, in my
presence.”
Gran said, “I have told you. I killed these men. You can decide, Inspector, which of us to believe.”
The door opened and Lydia walked in. I thought perhaps she’d been listening at the door, because she
didn’t appear to be surprised to see the Inspector or to feel the tension in the room.
“
The day Warner Brothers had declined to make the more personal Scissorhands even after the success of Batman, Burton finally agreed to direct the sequel for Warner Brothers on the condition that he would be granted total control. The result was Batman Returns which featured Michael Keaton returning as the Dark Knight, and a new triad of villains: Danny DeVito (as the Penguin), Michelle Pfeiffer (as Catwoman) and Christopher Walken as Max Shreck, an evil corporate tycoon and original character created for the film (similar to Superman III's Ross Webster). Darker and considerably more personal than its predecessor, concerns were raised that the film was too scary for children. Audiences were even more uncomfortable at the film's overt sexuality, personified by the sleek, fetish-inspired styling of Catwoman's costume. One critic remarked, "too many villains spoiled the Batman", highlighting Burton's decision to focus the storyline more on the villains instead of Batman. The film also polarized the fanbase, with some loving the darkness and quirkiness, while others felt it was not true to the core aspects of the source material. Burton made many changes to the Penguin which would be applied to the Penguin in both comics and television. While in the comics, he was an ordinary man, Burton created a freak of nature resembling a penguin with webbed, flipper-like fingers, a hooked, beak-like nose, and a penguin-like body. Released in 1992, Batman Returns grossed $282.8 million worldwide, making it another financial success, though not to the extent of its predecessor. This would also be the last Batman film to feature Burton and Keaton as director and lead actor respectively. Paul Reubens a.k.a. Pee-Wee from Pee-Wee's Big Adventure has a cameo as the Penguin's father.
The Nightmare Before Christmas
Main article: The Nightmare Before Christmas

Next, Burton wrote and produced (but did not direct, due to schedule constraints on Batman Returns) The Nightmare Before Christmas (1993), originally meant to be a children's book in rhyme. The film was directed by Henry Selick and written by Michael McDowell and Caroline Thompson, based on Burton's original story, world and characters. The film received positive reviews for the film's stop motion animation, musical score and original storyline and was a box office success, grossing $50 million. Burton collaborated with Selick again for James and the Giant Peach (1996), which Burton co-produced. The movie helped to generate a renewed interest in stop-motion animation.

A deleted scene from The Nightmare Before Christmas features a group of vampires playing hockey on the frozen pond with the decapitated head of Burton. The head was replaced by a jack-o'-lantern in the final version.
Cabin Boy
Main article: Cabin Boy

In 1994, Burton and frequent co-producer Denise Di Novi produced the 1994 fantasy-comedy Cabin Boy, starring comedian Chris Elliott and directed/written by Adam Resnick. Burton was originally supposed to direct the film after seeing Elliott perform on Get a Life, but handed the directing responsibility to Resnick once he was offered Ed Wood. The film was almost entirely panned by critics, even earning Chris Elliott a 1995 Razzie Award for "Worst New Star".[9] The film also has a 45% "rotten" rating on Rotten Tomatoes.
Ed Wood
Main article: Ed Wood (film)
His next film, Ed Wood (1994), was of a much smaller scale, depicting the life of Ed Wood, a filmmaker sometimes called "the worst director of all time". Starring Johnny Depp in the title role, the film is an homage to the low-budget science fiction and horror films of Burton's childhood, and handles its comical protagonist and his motley band of collaborators with surprising fondness and sensitivity. Owing to creative squabbles during the making of The Nightmare Before Christmas, Danny Elfman declined to score Ed Wood, and the assignment went to Howard Shore. While a commercial failure at the time of its release, Ed Wood was well received by critics. Martin Landau received an Academy Award in the Best Supporting Actor category for his portrayal of Béla Lugosi. Gene Siskel once said that two films, Ed Wood and Citizen Kane, be mandatory films to see in film classes.
Batman Forever
Main article: Batman Forever
Despite his intention to still lead the Batman franchise, Warner Bros. considered Batman Returns too dark and unsafe for children. To attract the young audience, it was decided that Joel Schumacher, who had directed films like The Client, lead the third film, while Burton would only produce it in conjunction with Peter McGregor-Scott. Following this change and the changes made by the new director, Michael Keaton resigned from the lead role and was succeeded by Val Kilmer. Filming began in late 1994 and recognized with new actors: Tommy Lee Jones, Nicole Kidman, Chris O'Donnell and Jim Carrey; the only two actors who returned were Pat Hingle and Michael Gough. The film, a mixture of darkness that characterized the saga with colors and neon signs proposed by Schumacher, was a huge box office success of $336 million, despite controversy over the characters and plot. Despite their friendship, Burton often disagreed with Schumacher's decisions, especially in the filming of several scenes which were removed from the final cut (later added as deleted scenes on the 2005 DVD release). Warner Bros. demanded Schumacher delete those scenes so the film did not have the same tone as its predecessor Batman Returns. According to an interview with Janet Scott Batchler, Tim Burton's only involvement as producer with Batman Forever was approving Joel Schumacher as director and Lee and Janet Scott Batchler as the writers. Burton did not contribute story ideas and the Riddler was not considered for the villain until Schumacher and the Batchlers were at the development stage. Schumacher was rehired to lead another sequel, the infamous Batman & Robin, in which Burton, for unknown reasons, did not participate.
James and the Giant Peach
Main article: James and the Giant Peach (film)
In 1996, Burton and Selick reunited for the musical fantasy James and the Giant Peach, based on the book by Roald Dahl. The film starred Richard Dreyfuss, Susan Sarandon, David Thewlis, Simon Callow and Jane Leeves among others, with Burton producing and Selick directing. The film was mostly praised by critics, and was nominated for the Academy Award Best Music, Best Original Musical or Comedy Score (by Randy Newman).
Mars Attacks!
Main article: Mars Attacks!
Elfman and Burton reunited for Mars Attacks! (1996). Based on a popular science fiction trading card series, the film was a hybrid of 1950s science fiction and 1970s all-star disaster films. Coincidence made it an inadvertent spoof of the blockbuster, Independence Day, made around the same time and released five months earlier. Although the film boasted an all-star cast, including Jack Nicholson, Pierce Brosnan, Michael J. Fox, Sarah Jessica Parker, Natalie Portman, Lukas Haas, Glenn Close, Martin Short, Rod Steiger and Jack Black, the film received mixed reviews by American critics and was mostly ignored by American audiences.[citation needed] It was more successful elsewhere.[citation needed]
Sleepy Hollow
Main article: Sleepy Hollow (film)
Sleepy Hollow, released in late 1999, had a supernatural setting and another offbeat performance by Johnny Depp as Ichabod Crane, now a detective with an interest in forensic science rather than the schoolteacher of Washington Irving's original tale. With Hollow, Burton paid homage to the horror movies of the English company Hammer Films. Christopher Lee, one of Hammer's stars, was given a cameo role. A host of Burton regulars appeared in supporting roles (Michael Gough, Jeffrey Jones and Christopher Walken, among others) and Christina Ricci was cast as Katrina van Tassel. Mostly well-received by critics, and with a special mention to Elfman's Gothic score, the film won an Academy Award for Best Art Direction, as well as two BAFTAs for Best Costume Design and Best Production Design. A box office success, Sleepy Hollow was also a turning point for Burton. Along with change in his personal life (separation from actress Lisa Marie), Burton changed radically in style for his next project, leaving the haunted forests and colorful outcasts behind to go on to directing Planet of the Apes which, as Burton had repeatedly noted, was "not a remake" of the earlier film.
Planet of the Apes
Main article: Planet of the Apes (2001 film)
Planet of the Apes was a commercial success, grossing $68 million in its opening weekend. The film has received mixed reviews and is widely considered inferior to the first adaptation of the novel. One criticism was that the movie went for a more watered down "popcorn" feel than the dark, cerebral and nihilistic tone of the 1968 film. The film was a significant departure from Burton's usual style, and there was much subsequent debate about whether the film was really Burton's, or if he was just a "hired gun" who did what he was asked.[10] Burton reportedly clashed with the studio during the whole making of the film, once going as far as abruptly leaving the set for the day. There were also many reports about last minute changes in the movie. The movie enjoyed commercial success and had an ending that clearly suggested the possibility of a sequel, but neither the studio nor Burton gave indications of making another Apes movie (which later became Rise of the Planet of the Apes). The ending was also closer to that of the novel. During the making of the film, Burton met actress Helena Bonham Carter, who would later become his long-term domestic partner.
Big Fish
Main article: Big Fish
In 2003, Burton directed Big Fish, based on the novel Big Fish: A Novel of Mythic Proportions by Daniel Wallace. The film is about a father telling the story of his life to his son using exaggeration and color. Starring Ewan McGregor as young Edward Bloom and Albert Finney as an older Edward Bloom, the film also stars Jessica Lange, Billy Crudup, Danny DeVito, Alison Lohman and Marion Cotillard. Big Fish received four Golden Globe nominations as well as an Academy Award nomination for the musical score by Danny Elfman. Big Fish was also the second collaboration with Burton and Helena Bonham Carter, who played the characters of Jenny and the Witch.
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005) is an adaptation of the book of the same name by Roald Dahl. Starring Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka, Freddie Highmore as Charlie Bucket and Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Bucket, the film generally took a more faithful approach to the source material than the 1971 adaptation, Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory, although some liberties were taken, such as adding Wonka's issue with his father (played by Christopher Lee). Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was later nominated for the Academy Award for Best Costume Design. The film made over $207 million domestically.
Corpse Bride
Main article: Corpse Bride
Corpse Bride (2005) was Burton's first full-length stop-motion film as a director, featuring the voices of Johnny Depp as Victor and Helena Bonham Carter (for whom the project was specifically created) as Emily in the lead roles. In this movie, Burton was able again to use his familiar styles and trademarks, such as the complex interaction between light and darkness, and of being caught between two irreconcilable worlds.
"Bones"
