157 


When Robert looked at the blood he was able to confirm what his father 
had told him. While doing this he stopped crying and his mother was able to 
clean him up. When he went to the doctor Robert asked if he was going to 
have as many stitches as his sister had once had. Apparently no anaesthetic 
was used while he was stitched up an he was totally absorbed by the whole 
procedure. 

Milton Erickson was acknowledged to be the leading hypnotherapist of 
his day and many would say he was probably the most brilliant this century! 

By training he was a psychiatrist and a psychologist and was a fellow of 
the American Psychiatric Association, the American Psychological 
Association, and the pathological Association, as well as being an honorary 
member of many medical societies of hypnosis from around the world. 

Dr Erickson placed great emphasis upon learning how to observe 
people. He himself had legendary powers of observation which he partly 
attributed to an attack of polio when he was seventeen. He had lost all sense 
of body awareness and couldn’t even tell the position of his arms or legs. He 
spent many hours trying to find a sense or feeling in his toes and feet so that 
he became acutely aware of his movements when his senses started to 
return. This knowledge enabled his to gain better use of his legs and he was 
able to walk again albeit with a limp. In the use of hypnosis, being able to 
accurately observe a subject’s subtle movements is very useful in gauging 
their progress as a hypnotic subject. (“people use those little telltale 
movements, those adjustive movements that are so revealing if one can 
notice them.’) 

Hypnotic Induction Techniques:


Last month I said that these days we no longer rely on gimmicks or 
paraphernalia in order to induce trances in people. Many experiments have 
shown that imaginary aids are much more effective. In one experiment one 
group of subjects where taught to induce a trance by staring at a crystal ball 
six inches away and slightly above their range of vision. When the same group 
where induced without a crystal ball they had problems and found it difficult. 
However when they where told to imagine looking at a crystal ball they went 
into a trance more quickly and the depth of the trance was more profound. 

Your imagination is a very powerful tool when used in hypnosis. The 
problem with external props is that they can actually distract you as you move 
into a trance. The regular pulse of a physical metronome can disturb you 
where as an imaginary one will speed up or slow down, get louder or quieter, 
depending on your needs. While you concentrate on the imaginary prop your 

158 


conscious mind is busy. 

The skill of the professional hypnotist depends on his ability to interpret 
a subjects reactions and body movements while they go into trance. In this 
way he can ensure that his suggestions have the greatest effect. A bad 
hypnotist will concentrate to much on what he is saying to a subject and not 
pay enough attention to what the subject is actually feeling and experiencing. 
For example expressions like sleep, sleepy, and sleeping should be timed to 
coincide with the movement of a subject’s eyelid movements and breathing. 

Erikson was acutely aware of this and he would go to great lengths to 
co-operate with a subjects own desires. On one occasion a subject who 
seemed unable to go into deep trance after several hours of effort asked if 
she could advise on the techniques being used. She was a graduate in 
psychology but had no experience of hypnosis. Erickson readily agreed and 
she would say things like:


“You‘re talking too fast on that point; you should say that very slowly and 
emphatically and keep repeating it. Say that very rapidly and wait a while and then 
repeat it slowly; and please, pause now and then to let me rest, and please don‘t 
split your infinitives]’ 

With her help she obtained a profound almost stuporous trance, which 
was achieved in only thirty minutes. 

Confusion Technique:


As with most hypnotic induction techniques what you are trying to do is 
suspend the critical factor. When using the confusion technique you present a 
whole series of individually differing, contradictory suggestions, which are at 
variance with one another. The aim is to cause the subject to make a constant 
shifts of orientation in order to try and make sense of it all. While the 
conscious mind is grappling with all this a simple emphatic suggestion to 
sleep is welcomed by the conscious mind. 

If we take hand levitation as an example. I might give someone strong 
suggestions to raise their right hand while also giving suggestions of 
immobility of the left hand. Then you give suggestions to levitate the left hand 
and immobility of the right hand. This is obviously contradictory. As the 
subject gets used to his confusion, and in so doing starts to co-operate with 
the suggestions, more suggestions are then given of immobility of both hands 
at the same time as suggestions of one levitating and the other remaining still, 
then a return to the original suggestion. 

159 


It is important to give your suggestions quickly, insistent, and confident in 
this way it is hard for the subject to make any sense of it all. What you want is 
for him to get used to his situation and co-operate as best he can. In this way 
he learns to yield to the situation you are creating. Eventually he will welcome 
any positive clear suggestion you make. 

Rehearsal Technique:


This was often used by Erickson with people who he thought were good 
potential subjects but who had initially made little response to hypnosis. There 
are different ways it can be used. Here is one example:-There was once a 
medical student who said he didn’t think he could develop amnesia in trance. 
He wanted to go into trance but at the same time didn’t want to co-operate 
with Erickson by developing amnesia. The student decided to take part in a 
demonstration but selected his own proof of amnesia namely the removal of 
his right shoe. 

He achieved a good trance and was given a large number of 
instructions such as borrowing a student’s cigarettes, another’s glasses, etc. 
While he was doing this Erickson repeatedly told him to forget the simple 
tasks he was carrying out. At some point Erickson slipped in the suggestion 
that upon awakening, while talking to the class about whether or not he had 
developed amnesia, he would cross the room , write a sentence on the 
blackboard, sign his name, while still talking to the class. 

When he awoke, he stated that he remembered everything that was 
said to him and what tasks he had performed. This remark was challenged in 
the class whereupon he then gave a heated account about what had taken 
place. While he was still talking to the class he strolled up to the blackboard, 
wrote the sentence signing his name and returned to his seat. 

When the writing on the board was brought to his attention he denied 
he had written it and triumphantly showed the class his right foot with the shoe 
still on it and declared that this proved his earlier statement that he had no 
amnesia. Continuing his remarks he absentmindedly removed his shoe from 
his right foot! He was unaware he had done this until after Erickson had 
dismissed the class. He finally agreed that he had indeed developed amnesia 
without conscious knowledge of the fact. The class returned and he was 
asked to write out the sentence once more. While he did this Erickson made a 
few suggestions and the student went back into a deeper trance. 

So what happened here was that the student was given a large number 
of simple tasks to perform seemingly to produce amnesia but in reality to allow 

160 


him to succeed again and again which was what he really wanted. What he 
thought of as failures, i.e. that fact that he could remember these acts, where 
successful rehearsals leading up to the main theme the development of 
amnesia. The careful way in which the main suggestion, the writing on the 
board, made it different from the more emphatic instructions used for the other 
acts. The little successes of not developing amnesia fuelled his desire for 
more success which was to actually develop amnesia. The process of writing 
out the sentence again placed him once more in same situation by that fact 
that he had already rehearsed this event before, and so a deep trance was 
made possible. 

Multiple Dissociation Technique:


Another technique Erickson often used to induce a deep trance and 
maintaining it is called the “Multiple Dissociation Technique”. What happens is 
the subject is invited to induce multiple hallucinations where different, but 
connected, objects are visualised. What he sometimes did was ask a subject 
to create in their mind a crystal ball while in a light trance. In one case he was 
dealing with a woman in a very depressed state and what he did was ask her 
to imagine a happy image or incident from her past. 

Soon she had several crystal balls in existence at the same time each 
representing a different part of her earlier life. Once she was co-operating in 
this way he found it easier to help her develop a deep and consistent trance 
necessary to help her therapeutically. The same technique was used with a 
musician where he was asked to think of a past experiences while at the same 
time putting a haunting sound track with it in his mind. The repetitive nature of 
this technique is very helpful to those people who are normally unresponsive 
to hypnotic suggestion. 

Post - Hypnotic -Techniques:


This is a technique where a hypnotist introduces a subtle or 
unobtrusive suggestion which will allow the subject to develop a spontaneous 
trance at a later stage. We have already seen an example of how a post 
hypnotic suggestion worked when the medical student repeated an act he 
had done previously while in trance, i.e. writing on the black board, which 
made him much more amenable to going into a second trance. Sometimes a 
subject finds it difficult to go into a deeper trance and so a post hypnotic 
suggestion can be a very useful ploy in these cases. If the subject can 
develop a spontaneous trance by executing a simple post-hypnotic act they 
can often be taught to deepen it. This method can be repeated at each stage 
making it easier and easier each time. 

161 


“The more casual hypnotic work can be 
done, the easier it is for the subject to 
adapt to it”. 

As you can probably see there is no hard and fast rule as to how a 
hypnotic trance should be induced it depends on you the subject and how you 
react to the hypnotist. With self-hypnosis by regularly practising you will be 
able induce a trance by being more and more aware of your mind and body. 
Sometimes you might feel too agitated to develop a trance which is fine and 
perfectly natural. The point is you cannot force it. Try to be relaxed and 
natural. 

Utilisation Techniques:


Sometimes you find a subject will resist the techniques of induction. By 
this I don’t mean they are being hypnotised against their will. Often they are 
desperate to be hypnotised, for whatever reason or problem they have, but 
their conscious mind frustrates any co-operation. Suggestions to respond to 
given directions like relax or simple hand levitation exercises are blocked. 

By accepting and utilising the resistance and working with it positively 
you can turn it to your advantage and induce hypnosis. For example someone 
who is resisting hand levitation might be told:


Shortly your right hand, or it maybe your left hand, will begin to lift up, or it may 
press down, or it may not move at all, but we will wait to see what happens, Maybe 
the thumb will be first, or you may feel something happening in your little finger, 
but the really important thing is not whether your hand lifts up or presses down or 
just remains still; rather, it is your ability to sense fully whatever feelings may 
develop in your hand” 

This kind of wording down plays actual motion, i.e. the lifting up, and 
pressing down, or no movement at all, cover all eventualities. So a situation is 
established whereby the subject can resist the process in a constructive and 
co-operative way. What ever happens to a subject’s hand, whether it moves 
up, presses down, or just rests there, they are now co-operating with the 
induction process. The hypnotist could go on a little later to give suggestions 
that the right hand will levitate, but the left hand will not. To resist this the 
subject must exhibit contrary behaviour. This makes it easier for the subject to 
co-operate. 

162 


“I’ve made no progress at all in three years of psychoanalysis, and the year I 
spent in hynpnotherapy was a waste of time. I didn’t even go into a trance. I tried hard 
enough. I just got nowhere. I’ve been referred to you and I don’t see much sense in it. 
Probably another failure. I just can’t conceive of me going into a trance. I don’t even 
know what a trance is.” 

From these remarks and the notes made by her doctor it was decided that 
the best way of getting her to go into a trance was to utilise her own words 
during the induction. 

You really can ‘t conceive of what a trance is---no, I can’t, what is it?----yes, 
what is it?----a psychological state, I suppose----A psychological state you suppose, 
what else?----I don’t know---you really don ‘t know---no, I don’t----you don‘t, you 
wonder, you think----think what yes, what do you think, feel sense? (Pause)----1 
don’t know----but you can wonder----do you go to sleep? so tired, relaxed, sleepy---really 
tired so very tired and relaxed, what else?----I’m puzzled----puzzles you, you 
wonder, you think, you feel, what do you feel?----my eyes----yes, your eyes, how?---they 
seem blurred----blurred closing----(pause)----sleep, tired, relaxed, sleep, 
breathing deeper----(pause)----eyes closed, breathing deeper. Relaxed, comfortable, 
so very comfortable, what else? (pause)----I don’t know you really don ‘t know, but 
really learning to go deeper and deeper----(pause)----Too tired to talk, just sleep---maybe 
a word or two----I don’t know (this was spoken laboriously)----breathing 
deeper and you really don’t know, just going deeper and deeper, sleeping soundly, 
more and more soundly, not caring just learning, continuing ever deeper and deeper 
and learning more and more with your unconscious mind. 

Once a trance was established she was given a post hypnotic suggestion to 
create future trances. 

163 


Pantomime Technique:


The name “pantomime technique” was coined after a visit Doctor 
Erickson made to a seminar in Mexico City in 1959. It is certainly one of his 
most impressive efforts in hypnotic induction. As a technique it has some 
similarities with the confusion technique; in so far as the subject has to be 
willing to accept any clear, unmistakable suggestions. 

A nurse was chosen as a subject for a demonstration of hypnosis. She 
had no previous knowledge of hypnosis, she knew next to nothing about 
Doctor Erickson, and could not speak or understand English. Erickson could 
not speak or understand Spanish! She had been told that the Doctor was from 
North America and would need her silent co-operation and that neither of 
them would be able speak to each other because of their language difficulties. 

The nurse was obviously uncertain as to what to expect but was eager 
to help and wanted to understand what was needed of her She was brought 
out on to the stage to meet Erickson and he walked quickly towards her with a 
broad smile and his right hand outstretched. He slowly shook hands with her 
staring at her fully in the eyes and gradually stopped smiling. As he did this he 
slowly let go of her hand in an irregular way by increasing pressure a little on 
her thumb, little finger, and then the middle finger. In this way she did not have 
any clear cut idea as to when he had completely withdrawn his hand. As he 
did this he altered the focus of his eyes and appeared to look through her. 
This minimal clue caused her eyes to dilate at which point he let go of her 
hand completely. 

This had the desired effect of leaving her hand resting in mid-air in a 
cataleptic position. He raised her hand slightly by putting a little upward 
pressure on the heal of it. Her other hand also showed signs of catalepsy and 
she remained staring unblinkingly at him. He then slowly closed his eyes and 
as he did so she followed his example. He then immediately opened his eyes 
and walked behind her and explained to the audience what he had done in 
English. The subject appeared not to hear him while he did this. 

She did not even react when he touched her ankle and lifted her foot up 
a little meaning she had to stand on one leg. He then put gently upward 
pressure on her eye lids which she then opened. Her pupils were still dilated 
and he pointed to his feet and then her raised foot and hands at which point 
she looked puzzled even embarrassed. He then gestured to her to lower her 
foot but the hands remained in catalepsy. A few of the audience were invited 
to talk to her in Spanish but she still stared fixedly at Erickson and made no 
response to the others. She also seemed to forget about her hands. 

164 


At this point one of the other doctors asked whether she could see the 
audience as she did not seem to hear them. Erickson then pointed to his eyes 
and then to hers bringing his fingers close them making a pointless sweeping 
gesture towards the audience; as if to say where are they, and pulling a 
suitably surprised face. She did the same thing and asked in Spanish “where 
are the doctors, they are supposed to be here?” She appeared confused and 
frightened and a few of the doctors spoke to her trying to reassure her but she 
still seemed unsettled. Erickson then quickly got her attention by putting his 
fingers close to hers and then to his own, lifted her hand, admiring a ring on 
her finger as he did so, and gave her a big, pleased, smile. At this point she 
lost her fear. 

Then a member of the audience asked how could he awaken her? 
Erickson then showed the girl the second hand on his watch and silently 
counted out ten seconds with his fingers, synchronised with the watch. Then 
she saw Erickson close his eyes, count out ten more seconds, and then open 
his eyes with an assertive nod of his head. He then smiled brightly at her and 
indicated that he wanted her to do the same thing. 

As she closed her eyes Erickson walked back to the far end of the 
platform where he was originally standing when she first came out on stage. 
As she opened her eyes she could see him where he originally stood and he 
walked up to her in the same manner. This re-established the link to the start 
of the induction and she achieved full awakening consciousness. 

They shook hands and he thanked her very much and bowed as if 
telling her he was finished with her. One on the doctors translated his 
remarks. She was very confused at being dismissed in this way because she 
could not remember any of the experiences of being in trance. She had total 
amnesia of the whole experience. 

Until I had read about this account of the pantomime technique I never 
thought it was possible to put someone into an hypnotic trance unless you 
could speak to the them in their own language. This just shows what a 
consummate exponent of the art of hypnosis Erickson was. Of course he 
made it all look so easy! 

The question of amnesia is an interesting one. Some subjects who can 
easily develop amnesia in a light trance might fail to do so in a deeper trance. 
Such anomalies arise because of a persons psychological orientation. In a 
light trance there is a mixture of conscious understanding and co-operation in 
what is going on. As the trance goes deeper we function much more in the 
subconscious state. In a deep trance subjects will behave in accordance with 
their subconscious patterns of awareness which very often differ from their 
conscious ones. 

165 


What can happen is that where people find it difficult to move into deeper trance 
states because they unwittingly interfere with the process because they have no 
experience of it. It is for this reason that a hypnotist might need to train a subject how 
to respond to hypnosis for a few sessions before any therapy or experimentation can 
take place. Eventually there will be a mixture of understanding between the conscious 
and subconscious, a kind of co-operation. However once a deeper stage of trance has 
been reached a subject will function directly at an subconscious level of awareness 
without interference by the conscious mind. 

166 


HOW TO SPEED UP YOUR READING:


Before I start to teach you how to drastically speed up your reading we 
must first find out at what pace you read now. Most people are normally 
categorised as either slow, average, above average, and fast readers. 

What I want you to do is find an ordinary book, preferably a hard back 
because it will make things easier. Now I want you to find a page to begin 
reading from and read for exactly one minute. Use a timer of some sort. Make 
sure you read in your normal fashion. Don’t try to speed it up for this test it does 
not matter whether or not you are a slow reader or a fast reader at this stage. 

When you have finished reading I want you to mark the page with a 
paper clip. Now I want you to find out how many words you have read in a 
minute. Don’t worry you don’t have to count them all. Just add up the words in 
three typical lines and divide that number by three. This will give you an 
average. Now count up the number of lines you have read, multiply them 
together and you will have your answer. Please write this number in the box 
below: 

Now I want you to think about the level of understanding you achieved 
while reading your passage. Was it good, average, or poor. Now I want you to 
put a tick inside the appropriate box:


Good Average 
Below Average 


Most people read between 200 and 350 words a minute. If you managed 
to get between these figures then you are considered to be an average reader. 

167 


There are some people who can naturally read over 1000 words per 
minute with excellent memory and comprehension. President Kennedy was 
reputed to have been able to read more than 2500 words per minute 
naturally. He would read up to six news papers from cover to cover over 
breakfast every morning. 

The British economist and philosopher John Stewart Mill said that the 
only thing that prevented him from reading faster than he did already was 
that he could not turn the pages over quickly enough. 

Incidentally the intelligence of a person does not have any direct effect 
on the speed at which they read. Some slow readers are people who have 
managed to obtain a Ph.D. while some fast readers have been known to 
have low tQs. So there is no connection between a person’s intelligence and 
how fast they can read. The difference between a fast reader and a slow 
reader is the way in which they look at the page. To see what I mean open 
your book once more at random and get ready to read a line from the left 
hand side. Now just think about how you are focusing on the page. You 
probably find that your eyes are focused on one line, and perhaps on two or 
three words in the line. 

Now I want you to use an old painters trick, I want you to turn the 
page upside down. Painters did this with their canvases because it helped 
them see if they had made any glaring errors in perspective or whatever. 
What this does is help you see the page in a different way. Obviously I don’t 
expect you to read it like this but I want you to look at the shapes the 
paragraphs make on the page. See how the different sections of the page 
are set out. 

Now turn the book the right way up and feel how your eyes respond. I 
expect that they probably start focusing again on the one or two words in the 
line you were looking at before. The strange thing is there is no reason why 
you should naturally do this. You do it because you have been taught to read 
in a particular way many years ago. 

Singular Word Reading:


What trained speed readers do, and naturally fast readers do, is read 
groups of words at a time with each fixation of their eyes. This greatly speeds 
up their reading and also makes it easier to understand and remember what 
they have read. 

Psychologists have discovered that most of us have a short term 
memory which can naturally absorb up to seven, plus or minus two, units or 
items at any given time. If you read one word at a time then the chances are 

168 


that you probably consider each word as a unit. What this can mean is that if 
the sentence is more than seven words it is possible to forget what you had 
just read at its beginning. This is why we sometimes have to re-read certain 
sentences from time to time. If you learn to scan four words at a time then the 
chances are that each of your seven units you now will contain four words. 

This not only increases your memory but also dramatically increases the 
speed at which you read by three or four times. In actual fact the effect is to 
increase your reading speed much more than that because if you read one 
word at a time it is easy to become bored which means we lose our 
concentration. This has an adverse affect on our comprehension and 
memory. 

SUB-VOCALISATION 

This is another major reason that many people cannot read very 
quickly. I want you to start reading a short passage from your book again. 
Can you hear a little voice inside your head speaking the words to you as you 
read. This what is known as sub-vocalisation. If you pronounce each word 
silently inside your head as you read you effectively limit your reading speed 
to the speed at which you speak and not the speed at which you think! 

In some people so deep routed is this tendency to vocalise what they 
are reading that they actually mouth the words as they read. Incidentally it is 
for this reason that doctors will not allow patients to read if they have just had 
a deilcate operation on their throat or vocal chords. 

There is an interesting statistic which states that there are over one 
million words in the English language. Out of all those words we have about 
four hundred structure or linking words like, (and, but, the, of, etc ) These 
words don’t carry any significant meaning on their own, however, amazingly 
those four hundred words make, on average, up to 60%-65% of what you 
have ever read or will read in the future. 

So if you could stop sub-verbalising these relatively insignificant words 
while reading you will be able to focus on the other more meaningful words. 
In this way you can improve your speed and comprehension at the same 
time. 

This does not mean I want you to leave these words out because that 
would change the meaning but see them but don’t try to pronounce them. A 
lot of our problems we have with reading have to do with the way we view the 
page. 

169 


Regression in this context has nothing to do with hypnosis. What we 

mean here is the situation whereby we sometimes re-read the same 

sentence twice. Our eyes simply make a mistake. It is estimated that the 

average person will re-reads about one sixth of what he is reading. What this 

does is not only slow down your reading, because your eyes have to re


adjust but it affects out understanding and concentration as well. 

Another factor which is closely linked to regression is called:


SLOW RECOVERY TIME:


This is the time it takes for your eyes to move from the end of one line 

to the start of the next one. Incredible as it sounds it is estimated that the 

average reader will spend about one third of their time just trying to find the 

next line. So if you have just read for an hour you might have spent twenty 

minutes just staring at empty space looking for the next line. That means you 

have spent twenty minutes looking at nothing This not only slows down your 

reading but disrupts your short term memory by fragmenting your ideas as 

the information is fed into the brain. 

So to recap on the main obstacles to fast reading, they are:


1. Singular Word Reading. 
2. Sub-vocalisation. 
3. Regression. 
4. Slow Recovery Time. 
Now I am going to show you how you can deal with these obstacles. The 
technique you about to learn is very simple but very effective, but you must 
practise it regularly over a period of time. What we want to do is improve 
your :


1. Speed at which your read. 
2. Your understanding of what you read. 
3. Concentration. 
4. Memory of what you have read. 
170 


In a short space of time you will be able to more than double the rate 
at which you read. Not only that you will increase your understanding and 
recall of what you read. 

To get started all you need is an index finger. If you are right handed 
you will use your right index finger and if you are left handed you will use 
your left one. Fold your other fingers into your hand to make a fist leaving 
your index finger sticking out. 

What you do now is take the book you had earlier and underline each 
of the lines you read earlier with your finger while focusing your eyes on the 
words directly above the tip of your finger. 

Only go as fast as you feel comfortable. I do not want you to actually 
read or necessarily understand what you are looking at, you are simply 
practising a technique at this stage. While you are underlining each line in 
this way you should move your finger back to the beginning of the next line 
as fast as you can without making any jerky movements. Try and make your 
actions as smooth as possible. If your finger makes too awkward a 
movement this will cause you to be distracted. Let it glide across to the next 
line. 

Fast is good. Smooth is better! 

Practise this for a while in order to develop the necessary fluidity 
before going on to the next step. 

Once you have mastered this try the next step. What you are going to 
do now is do an exercise that widens your range or field of vision. I want you 
to divide each line into three sections. You are still going to underline each 
line with your finger but this time there will a minute pause between each 
section. You must put all your concentration into expanding your field of vision. 
This exercise is a little harder but you will get there if you practise. 

Again you are not trying to understand what you are reading. It is purely 
an exercise to expand your vision. You should concentrate totally on seeing 
three or four words at a time. Your eyes are trying to scan each section. They 
are trying to scan them simultaneously in one swoop. Don’t rush this pad but 
spend about three seconds on each line i.e. one second over each section. 

Practise this exercise in one minute bursts and then rest in between. You 
should spend about ten to fifteen minutes a day for the next month or so. You 
should notice a bid difference after this time. You will no longer grope around for 
individual lines but select small phrases. 

171 


Speed Drill Exercises Step One:


This next step is a little similar to the last exercise except that you will 

be concentrating on building up you your reading speed. You will not be 

concerned with comprehension at all at this stage. In fact you will be forcing 

yourself to scan the lines at speeds so fast that comprehension will be 

impossible. Why do this? 

Speed, as Einstein knew, is entirely relative. When the first trains where 
invented people were terrified at travelling at speeds of 25 miles per hour. It 
was even considered dangerous and un-natural. However today this speed 
would seem unbearably slow. When you first join the motorway, after 
crawling alone at thirty miles per hour the speed of seventy miles per hour, 
more ilkely ninety, seems very fast even scary. However after a few minutes 
you adjust to it and the speed feels quite normal, even slow. If there is a hold 
up or some congestion on the road you might have to reduce your speed to 
fifty or even forty miles per hour How fast does your speed feel then? It feels 
very slow after travelling at seventy five. It is exactly the same with your 
reading speed. 

So how does this apply to speed reading? Well what you are going to do 
is practise seeing words at rates as high as five thousand words each 
minute. Now you are not going to be reading at this rate just seeing that 
number of words. The reason you are doing this is that when you slow your 
rate down to only one thousand or perhaps eight hundred words a minute 
you will be able to read, comprehend and remember what you are reading. 

Now mark the book where you want to start from. Now using your 
index finder again you are going to scan the lines as before but this time 
you will go at a much faster pace. You don’t want to go so fast that the 
words are just a blur but certainly faster than you think you can 
understand them. Remember this is a speed practise not an actual 
reading practise. 

For two minutes just scan down the lines remembering to move 
quickly and smoothly from the end of one line to the other. if you find that 
you can actually comprehend what you are scanning then you are going 
much too slow. So speed up! 

Remember the words should appear clear to you and 
not blurred. 

Now when you have being doing this for two minutes, use a kitchen 
timer or something similar, mark the place in the book where you eventually 
stop. 

172 


Don’t worry too much if you felt that you didn’t see every single word 
clearly or that your eyes didn’t always keep up with your finger. This is 
normal when you first try this exercise. You may even feel a bit tired, this is 
also normal. In time these problems will go eventually, the thing is to keep 
practising. 

Step Two:


Now I want you to go back to your first marker. What you are going to 
do now is repeat the same exercise except this time you are going to cover 
the same ground in only one minute. That’s right only one minute. This is 
very important. You must get to your marker by the time one minute is up 
even if you have to scramble through the lines and you experience all the 
problems mentioned above. You will probably find that some of the words do 
appear blurred and you lose your hand to eye co-ordination this does not 
matter, just keep going. 

You will be moving at twice the speed. If you have trouble keeping 
track of time get someone to count down the seconds for you. 

If you don’t manage to get to your marker in time do this section 
again. If you past your marker all well and good just move your marker to 
that point. 

When you have got used to practising step two you can go on to the 
next stage. Now you are going to cover the same ground in only thirty seconds. 

At this stage you may well find the words appearing blurred to you. In 
fact you will probably think you can only see part of each line. You will almost 
certainly have to underline three or four lines which each sweep of your finger. 

To make the exercise easier imagine your index finger is like a paint 
brush. Simply sweep across the page as fast as you can. Now set your timer 
for thirty seconds. Keep your eyes focused as best you can as you sweep 
down the page. This exercise should be practised for about fifteen minutes 
each day for at least three weeks. 

If you make it a daily routine to go through these exercises your reading 
speed and comprehension will increase dramatically. However there is another 
technique that I am about to tell you about which can give you extraordinary 
power to process information into your brain:


173 


Subconscious Reading Power:


The technique I am going to outline now is different from the exercises 
mentioned above. The speed reading exercises are based mainly on using 
you conscious mind however they will help with you with next technique. 

You might remember me telling you that your mind can absorb over two 
million pieces of information every second. Well it is possible to use this fact 
to your advantage. Since you will be utilising your subconscious mind you 
will need to relax your conscious mind sufficiently in order to allow your 
subconscious the freedom to act. 

This technique is not like reading a book in the usual way and you will 
not necessarily know consciously whether or not you have absorbed any 
information. You might be wondering why use this technique at all in the first 
place. Having learnt to scan the book while in a deeply relaxed state your 
subconscious mind will see and absorb the words on the page at an 
incredible rate. Having just scanned the book in this way you just seem to 
obtain knowledge intuitively. It is not a conscious thing. Someone asks you a 
relevant question about the book and you just seem to know the answer. 

Some highly placed sales personnel are now learning this technique in 
order to get an edge over their competitors. By scan reading it is possible to 
absorb an astonishing amount of information that would take a hundred 
times longer doing it the conventional way using conscious effort. It means a 
sales person could mug up on a particular topic relevant to a customer’s 
needs and be able to converse with them and make the appropriate 
responses. 

Step One:

 
Let yourself drift into a light trance using whatever method works best 
for you. Imagine your mind being opened up to receive information. It feels 
relaxed and responsive. You want to be in as quiet a room as possible 
without any possibility of being disturbed.

 Stay in this pleasant state for about ten minutes. In your imagination 
have a book in front of you and turn to page one. Imagine your eyes acting 
like a camera, a bit like a spy who photographs documents turning the pages 
calmly and efficiently. Your eyes simply absorb what on each page. Imagine 
it feeling perfectly natural and effortless. Don’t force it. 

174 


Come back to a kind of semi-waking consciousness. Try to 
retain that feeling of calm and focus. Find a book you would like to 
practice with and open it to the first page. Now simply turn the pages 
over as calmly as you can, like you did in your imagination a shod 
while age, and at a speed which feels appropriate for you. Just keep 
turning the pages until you finish the book. As you turn the pages 
silently chant to yourself “Read----Relax Read Relax. 

Don’t try to read in any conventional sense of the word, simply 
photograph each page as you go. In that sense it is similar to the 
earlier exercises. However with this method it is possible to achieve 
incredible speeds. 

It is as simple as that. Remember you will not be consciously 
aware that you have read anything at all. 

This exercise can be used in conjunction with the earlier one. It 
will probably take a little time for you to accept that your are actually 
processing this information. Tests have shown that this technique 
works. People who have read a book in this way, in a matter of just a 
few minutes, are then given a multiple choice questionnaire. They are 
generally able to achieve 70% accuracy. This is a figure which is much 
higher than could be achieve on the basis of pure chance. 

Using specially designed computer programmes some people 
have been able to absorb 690,000 words a minute. What they do is 
provide the conscious mind with a 3D magic eye picture to look at on a 
computer screen. At the same time hundreds of pages of words are 
flashed on the screen at great speed. The subconscious mind simply 
processes the information because the conscious mind is kept busy 
elsewhere. 

Of course it is all a question of practise. The more used you get 
to trying these techniques the more you will learn to accept them. If you 
don’t believe you are capable of doing them the chances are you won’t. 
Your critical factor or belief factors might prevent you. However 
perfectly normal ordinary people have learned to do these things so 
you can too! Remember keep positive. 

KEEP PRACTISING!! 


175 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind!! 


Part Nine 
Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


176 


Part Nine 

Learning how to learn.

 Imagine if you could enrol in a college, or on a course, which taught a 
curriculum in such a way that you felt that after only a few weeks you had 
learnt more than you did after four or five years at school. 

Most of us were educated in schools where the children sat in drab 
uniform rows and information was churned out on a daily basis on all manner 
of subjects. Much of the information we learnt at school is virtually never used 
in later life and many people leave school with a profound feeling of failure in 
one or more subjects. 

If we were lucky we were good in one or two subjects and perhaps just 
OK at others. If we were really lucky we might have excelled at three subjects 
and been above-average in the others. Of course there will always be some 
who seem to be brilliant at everything. This might be you! 

I find it strange that a large number of children can spend 16 or more 
years in the state educational system but appear to get very little from it. In 
some cases if they can just about read or write properly then this is 
considered a success. I'm not criticising teachers here but merely making 
an observation of my own. 

Can you think back to your school days and remember which subjects 
interest you most? Which lessons did you eagerly wait to get to and which 
teachers you most liked and respected? Which teachers have made a 
difference in your life? Which teachers made their subject come alive and fun 
and made you want to learn more? 

Many psychologists have studied the mind in recent years and have 
discovered some fascinating things about how it likes to work. I want to 
share some of this information with you because I think it will have a dramatic 
effect on your life from this moment on. 

If you have ever watched a young child playing you will have noticed 
how he will pick up a toy or some other object and examine it with fascination 
and an insatiable curiosity. He will bang it on the floor, he will put it in its 
mouth, and will wave it slowly in the air and then perhaps move it faster while 
observing how the light reflects off the surface. 

177 


This process of learning is known as "Global learning". This is the most 
natural way we can learn anything. Infants are not taught to do this it is their 
natural instinct to learn in this way. Provided a child feel secure and loved 
within its environment its mind will absorb an immense quantity of information 
from birth right up to the age of six or seven. A child's mind during these years 
can be likened to a sponge. 

What is more this process is made all the more pleasurable for the 
child because it is carried out in the stress free environment where the child 
receives bucket loads of positive feedback and encouragement from its 
parents and relatives. This is a perfect way in which to learn. 

If you have had children yourself, you will remember what a great day 
it was when your first-born took his first tentative steps. Can you remember 
how you felt? The fact is it is an amazingly difficult task to learn how to walk 
but despite this fact we all seem to manage it. Even though we must have all 
fallen down countless times, sometimes painfully, we never got discouraged 
or felt a failure in anyway. Have you ever stopped to wonder why that is? 
Despite all the setbacks and constant falls you never thought of giving up, you 
simply picked yourself up and tried again. You see at that age you never 
even considered yourself a failure because you had no idea of this concept. 

While you were practising learning to walk your parents were 
constantly urging you on and encouraging you every step of the way in your 
quest, because they were sure you would get there in the end. Each time 
you had a bit of success and managed to take a few more steps on your own 
your parents would respond by heaping praise on you which in turn 
encouraged you to seek greater success. 

At about the age of two you would have probably taught yourself how 
to communicate using language. In fact most children will have learnt about 
90 per cent of all the words most commonly used by the time they reach the 
age of five! 

It is a well known fact that if you grow up in a family where two 
languages are spoken you would almost certainly be fluent in both by this 
time. This is particularly true if your mother spoke a different language to that 
of the country in which you lived. 

By the time you were six you would probably have mastered the basics 
of what is considered to be the hardest learning task any human can 
undertake: learning to read. 

178 


Then what happened? You went to school! It was probably here that 
you start to get your first real sense of the concept of failure. Maybe a teacher 
asked the class a question and you eagerly put up your hand and gave the 
answer you thought to be correct only to be told that you were wrong. At this 
point your classmates began giggling at you and you felt embarrassed. This 
was probably your first feeling of failure. 

In America in 1982 a study carried out by Jack Canfield into self-
esteem used a sample of a hundred children each assigned to a researcher 
for the day. Each researcher made a note of the number of positive and 
negative remarks the child received. 

What they found was that on average every child received 460 
critical or negative remarks to 75 positive ones! That is a ratio of more than 
six negative strokes to the one positive one. The effect of this overtime on 
some children can be devastating. We dealt with some aspects of positive 
and negative strokes in part three so I don't want to repeat myself here. 
Suffice to say many children subconsciously give up at school and stop 
learning at this time. They begin to feel unworthy and a failure. 

I can remember my eldest daughter's early years. She managed to 
learn to read quite early on at about the age of four because we encouraged 
her and taught her the phonetic alphabet. We were very pleased and proud 
with the progress she was making and our praise of her made her feel good 
about herself. This spurred her on make greater efforts and seek more 
success. 

Unfortunately we didn't pay that much attention to her ability in maths. 
In school she found maths difficult. Because her ability at maths was much 
lower than her ability at reading she shunned the subject and felt a failure. 
Anyway like most parents do we tried to help her. At first she was reluctant to 
try. It was almost as though the subject caused her pain. We made the idea of 
“doing sums” fun by making it into a game. She soon became absorbed in 
the subject and as we praised her progress to the rooftops her confidence 
grew. Soon she would come home from school proudly telling us that she 
found maths easy and badgered us to play the “sums” game again. 

The trouble is some children don't get this kind encouragement at 
home and the schools don't have the resources to fully counter this lack of 
support. The situation is aggravated by the fact that the learning environment 
in school moves away from the more holistic approach, i.e. a global, to a 
more inflexible language based system. 

The situation becomes more common as you progress through the 

179 


school system. Typically pupils sit in regimented rows and are lectured to 
from the front of the class. All the fun and colourful aspects of nursery school 
or elementary school are gone. What has happened is that the learning 
process has come to rely on using the left side of the brain, this is known as 
left brained activity. This imbalance between using the whole brain, as in 
nature's Global learning approach, to relying on just one side of the brain 
causes some children to feel confused and a failure. In fact the very words 
study or learning trigger feelings of tension and loathing. 

It is a funny thing but in the work I do and in learning all the techniques 
involved in personal development I cannot remember learning anything quite 
like them in school. I can understand that you should give people a balanced 
education in society but it seems to me that the emphasis is on trying to get 
young people to absorb large quantities of information regardless of whether 
they're interested or need it. 

Can you remember revising for an exam the night before and 
frantically trying to cram as much information into your poor mind as you 
could? Did you go into the examination with a feeling of panic and nausea? 

Why is it important to know the date of the battle of Hastings or the 
American Civil War? Why is it important to know the capital city of Argentina? 

If for the sake of argument we assume that it is vital for all our 
children to know the names and dates of the all the Kings and Queens of 
England, the names of all the counties, and the provincial towns within those 
counties etc.. I would have thought that if one of the goals of education is to 
get young people to learn and retain all this stuff why not teach them the 
techniques to do this efficiently and easily? 

Next month I will show you some simple techniques that you can use 
to remember a list of a hundred objects, even 500 objects, or a 1000 if you 
want to. Not only is it possible to remember them it is also possible to 
remember them in any order! It is relatively easy to do this. 

And I don't want you thinking that you are to old to do this because 
you're never too old to learn this stuff. In fact some the techniques you are 
going to learn are thousands of years old. The ancient Romans and Ancient 
Greeks used them. 

Do you think that if young children were gradually shown how to do this 
in a way that was fun and enjoyable it would improve their feeling of self worth 
and confidence? 

180 


If we take the trouble to understand how the brain likes to process 
information and study ourselves to discover how we as individuals most 
like to absorb that information we can make learning a much easier, 
more efficient, and enjoyable process. 

Left And Right Brain Activity:


In a previous release we discussed some of the functions of the 
various parts of the brain. What I want to do now is take this a little further. 
Although our brains can be considered to be constructed in three parts, the 
stem or reptile brain, the limbic system, and the neocortex, it has long been 
thought that you can break down these functions into two parts. As far as the 
thinking processes go we can assume that our brains consist of two 
hemispheres, left brain (neocortex) and right brain the (limbic system). 

Experiments have shown that each one is responsible for different 
kinds of thinking and will specialise in certain skills. This is obviously an oversimplification 
and the two hemispheres do interact with each other but broadly 
speaking each hemisphere of the brain is responsible for different functions. 
Each side of the brain is responsible for different aspects of human 
behaviour. 

Left Brain (Verbal):

 
The left brain controls the right side of your body and its mode of 
thinking tends to be on the logical and analytical side. It is highly organised 
although it can use abstract thought. It controls our language, speech, 
reading, writing, and hearing associations. It is both rational and logical and 
likes to deal with the information sequentially. It handles subjects like maths, 
science, philosophy etc. 

Right Brain (Visual):


The right brain which controls the left side of your body prefers to deal 
in random, unordered, and intuitive modes of thought. It is ideally suited to 
deal with feelings and emotions. It is this side of the brain which deals with 
spatial awareness, and shape or pattern recognition. It is also the side of your 
brain which appreciates music, art, and visualisation, in other words controls 
our creative side. 

181 


Both sides of the brain are equally important and if you are lucky you 
will use both hemispheres in harmony with each other. People who favour 
each hemisphere equally find the learning process much easier this is 
because they can call on either side depending on what the subject is that 
they want to learn. Although people with a dominance on the left side will 
tend to find learning easier than people with the dominance on the right side. 
This is because most forms of communication are expressed either by verbal 
means or in written form which are both left brain activities. 

Some psychologists believe that if you favour the left side of your brain 
more than the right then you should make an effort to carry out some right 
brain activities. Activity like learning a musical instrument or taking up 
painting are both good examples. This is because it is believed it is unhealthy 
to be centred heavily in one area or mode of thought. Do you remember the 
concept of yin and Yang. 

In the West and increasingly in other cultures greater emphasis is 
placed on the left brain activities. 

It maybe that while you were at school you felt you didn't have the 
right kind of “brain” for certain subjects. Or maybe you felt that your brain was 
good at other subjects. There may have been some subjects which you felt 
you would never be able to cope with. The fact is that we are all born with 
brains that are virtually indistinguishable from one another. 

If you wish to improve your learning skills you need to try and find out 
how you process information in a way that suits you best. If you think you 
naturally favour one hemisphere more than another then perhaps you should 
consider doing activities to stretch the less dominant side. 

It is not just useful for you to know what your preferences are, it can 
also be very useful to know the preferences of others because it can help you 
get your point across to them more effectively. It could help you with your 
boss, your colleagues at work, your spouse, and your children. In short if you 
think about it knowing this information could improve your relationships with 
others on all sorts of levels. 

How easily you perceived information is known as your “modality”, and 
how your order and process this information is called your "brain dominance". 
There are three main modes all modalities of learning. These are: - Visual, 
auditory, kinaesthetic. 

182 


Visual:


Visual people not surprisingly prefer to learn via their sight. For example they 
like to write things down on a piece of paper before they can remember them. 
If you asked a visual person a particular word they are usually able to see it in 
their mind’s eye or prefer to write it down on a piece of paper. They say things 
like "I can see what you mean" or "I get the picture". 

Visual people are often smart dressers. They tend to speak quickly. 
There are often good at organising and planning events. Doodling on a piece 
of paper when making a phone call is sometimes a clue. 

Before undertaking a project they need to have an overview in detail 
before committing to it. They have problems remembering verbal messages 
and are not easily distracted by noise. The visual person would prefer to have 
directions in the form of a map rather than rely on spoken instructions. 
Visual people will often make good artists. 

Typical expressions used by visual people are as follows: 


Get a bird's eye view. 
Take a dim view of that. 
I see eye to eye with him. 
In the light of what has occurred, or, in view of what has occurred. 
I had a mental picture in my mind. 


Auditory:


Auditory people might say something like "that rings a bell" or "that 
sounds good to me". They like to read aloud and often talk to themselves. 
They can be distracted by sounds easily. They prefer to tell you things rather 
than write them out. They tend to remember things they've heard more easily 
than things they've seen. They like to spell words out loud rather than write 
them down on a piece of paper. Auditory people will often be very musical. 

They might use expressions like: 


I am all ears. 
You can call on me any time. 
He gave me an earful. 
I hear you loud and clear. 
I'd never heard of such a thing. 


183 


Kinaesthetic:


These people often be very tactile and want a touch you in order to get 
your attention. They will often stand quite close your while they address you. 
They will often use their arms and hands to express themselves while 
speaking. When reading they like to use their finger as a pointer. They tend 
speak more slowly and use words of action. They tend to be physically 
active and dislike to sit still for prolonged periods of time. These are the 
people who if given a wardrobe to put together will prefer to experiment with 
all the bits and pieces rather than rely on the written instructions like a visual 
person would do. An auditory person would prefer to be told what to do. 

They might say things like a "I feel the same way". They use expressions 
like:


Get to grips with the problem. 
Put my cards on the table. 
Boils down to. 
Get in touch with. 
Pulled some strings. 


There are no hard and fast rules in determining which category you 
come under. Most people would use a mixture of those expressions 
mentioned above however they can give you a fair idea if you are particularly 
dominant in one area or another. 

You can get a pretty fair idea of the modality of another person by the 
kind words they use. By adapting your behaviour to suit the modality of 
another you can achieve a great rapport with that person. If you are speaking 
to somebody whom you believe to be a visual person sit up straight in your 
chair or stand up. This tends to make you speak more quickly. If you can 
match the rate at which you speak to the other person's you create a climate 
of understanding. If you are speaking to a Kinaesthetic person on the phone 
sit back and put your feet up, this will help you slow down the rate which you 
speak. 

As far as increasing your ability to learn and process information is 
concerned it is useful to know whether you favour one form of modality over 
another. If you are an auditory type of person for example, you may prefer to 
attend lectures and use audio cassettes to learn your subject. You could find 
for example the playing of music and the background of trying to study is too 
much of a distraction. (Although studies have shown that some kinds of 
music, particularly baroque music, when played at a certain tempo can be 
very beneficial). 

184 


And a visual person might find studying near large window a distraction 
because of all the activity that might be going on outside. 

In order to improve our learning skills we have to try and stimulate as 
many of our senses at one and the same time. In the section dealing with 
note taking you will see what I mean. However knowing what your individual 
preferences are will help you to develop the most appropriate methods to suit 
you. 

The most important attribute you can have if you are to absorb information 
and learn effectively is Good Concentration. 

185 


How To Develop A Good Concentration: 


I think most of us would agree that if we are studying or reading about 
a subject that is particularly close to our hearts we will find it easier to 
concentrate on it. Our minds will be less likely to wander off and be 
distracted. 

The ability to focus our minds on the subject at hand is very important 
if we are to be effective in absorbing the information. It helps if we can 
eliminate outside distractions, as I have previously mentioned, and create a 
learning environment which is conducive to our own personal preferences. 

In general he should aim for an environment which is comfortable. If 
you're working at a desk make sure that your chair is at the right height. 
Ensure the lighting is sufficient so that you don't have to strain your eyes. 
Some people prefer a very ordered unstructured environment in which to 
work. Others prefer a more casual atmosphere in which to work and perhaps 
prefer to sit in a comfy armchair or lounge around on a settee when studying 
and then moved to a desk to make written notes. 

However it is the distractions that come from within our own minds 
which cause us the most problems. 

From our study of meditation we have seen how difficult it is to quieten 
the mind. If we were trying to study while we're in pain from toothache, or 
whatever, it is much harder to focus on the task in hand. 

However you should be at an advantage here because by practising 
self hypnosis, or meditation, you will develop the ability to quieten the mind 
naturally. Before you start to study prepare your mind by slowing the 
breathing down and meditating for a few minutes. 

Relaxation is the key to success in most things in life however the 
other most vital ingredient is to have a positive frame of mind. When revising 
or learning new material having a positive attitude is as important as anything 
else. If you're positive that you are going to remember the information you are 
studying, then you have a much greater chance succeeding. 

As an aid to relaxation background music can often be a very good 
thing. When we are studying hard our pulse and blood pressure tend to rise. 
Our brain waves speed up and in some cases the muscles can get tense. As 
we know, when we meditate the opposite is true. However it can be hard to 

186 


maintain our concentration while we are deeply relaxed. Some psychologists 
believe they have discovered a solution to this problem which is to play a 
certain kind of music in the background while working. 

The most effective music was found to be the music of baroque 
composers like Bach, Handel, Pachelbel, Teleman, to name but a few. 
Music which has a tempo of 60 beats per minute is particularly effective 
because this tempo happens to be about the same as the pulse of the 
average person's heart rate when relaxed. 

Tests have shown that it is not just humans that can benefit by 
listening to this music. Even plants will grow better and more healthily 
exposed to baroque music. They will even lean towards the speakers in the 
same way as they might lean or tilt towards the sun! (It is even more 
interesting to note that the same plants tend to shrivel up and die if they are 
exposed to loud heavy metal rock music!) 

We don't yet know why this is but some scientists believe that because 
studying tends to be a left brain activity music can activate our intuitive and 
creative side of the right brain. This means that both sides of our brain can be 
integrated into the learning process. I'm sure we can all remember situations 
at meetings or in the school room where we found ourselves dreaming and 
staring out of the window into space. This is because our right brain was not 
engaged. Of course once you have finished studying there is nothing wrong 
with playing something more upbeat if you want to. 

To summarise:


1. Quieten your mind by meditating for a few moments before 
revising or studying. 
2. Make sure the area in which you are studying is 
comfortable and conducive to you and, as far as possible, 
free from outside interference. 
3. Ensure that you have a positive attitude towards the work 
you are doing. 
4. Play baroque music at a low volume in the background. 
Maintaining a positive attitude while working is obviously desirable but 
not always easy to achieve. Sometimes we need a little help or extra 
motivation. 

187 


What Will I Get Out Of It? 


The problems of concentration tend to arise more frequently when we 
are learning a subject because we have to and not because we want to. By 
now you will realise that the state of your mind or your attitude towards 
something is of vital importance. If you're trying to learn, but at the same time 
your telling yourself that you hate the subject, or you don't think you will ever 
be able to learn all this stuff, then you're creating a self-fulfilling prophecy. 

From time to time we all have to learn things that we would prefer not 
to. The answer to the problem is to find the motivation to spur us on and 
achieve our goal. If possible we should look for a positive motivation. 
Negative motivation takes the form of "I really would like to have another 
helping of ice-cream but if I do I just know I'll put tons of weight on". Positive 
motivation on the other hand might take the form of "if I can pass this exam 
and get a good grade I will be able to go to the university of my choice". 
Positive motivation is always preferable. 

What you have to do is try and identify as many benefits of carrying out 
an action as you can. If you can keep these benefits in mind you will help to 
focus yourself. You could read out one of these benefits to yourself each time 
you sit down to study. 

Suppose you have just joined an evening class to learn French. 
However when you come home at night from work in after a long day you feel 
tired and simply want to put your feet up after dinner. You'll have to run 
through and your mind what motivated you to the join the class and the first 
place. But maybe you'd like to go to France on your holidays frequently and 
would love to be able to wander through the markets and speak to the people 
about the goods they are selling. Or perhaps you want to buy a property there 
and maybe retire one-day. Alternatively you might feel under the weather and 
want an early night after a long day at work. You might come to the 
conclusion that you probably would not be able to concentrate the way you 
feel. 

We all have to make these kind of decisions on a daily basis from the 
smallest trivial situation right up to the big life changing decisions. 

If there is a subject or a project that you have to study because your 
course requires it or it is essential to your job, then you have to do it one way 
or the other. This is where your knowledge of self hypnosis can help. By 
singling out all the most positive aspects of carrying out and learning the task 
at hand and writing them down you can help your mind to focus on the 
positive. Using your self hypnosis tape you received with an earlier release, 

188 


imagine that you have completed your task and are reaping all the wonderful 
benefits that this brings. There might be a promotion, more money upon 
gaining an extra qualification, anything really. The important thing is to 
concentrate on something that motivates you. 

There is another technique that some people found useful. When 
sitting down to study instead of saying "Oh God I hate this stuff" do this 
instead. For five to ten minutes either write down on a piece paper or speak 
out loud telling yourself that you think / find the subject you are learning 
fascinating and totally absorbing. Tell yourself that you are learning 
everything easily. The more you become engrossed in the subject the more 
fascinating it becomes to you. 

It might sound a bit strange but by battering the conscious mind in this 
way your message can make its way through to the subconscious. The 
conscious mind will give up and say, OK then you win, this stuff is really 
fascinating. 

Make sure you maintain this positive attitude when you begin to study 
and persevere with it. Imagine what if feels like to be engrossed in a subject, 
what sensations you normally experience etc. Recreate these sensations 
in your own mind. 

You can make learning your given subject one of your short term goals 
as we discussed in part four. Is often a good idea to give yourself a reward 
once you have completed a given task. It might be a trip to the cinema, or a 
meal out with a friend, or just a good bottle of wine. (I know which I would 
prefer)! 

Celebrate!! 


Celebration is important part in trying to motivate yourself. You should 
never ignore this aspect because it reinforces the positive side of what you 
are trying to do. Once you have succeeded and completed your task you will 
get a feeling of accomplishment and this will give you the confidence to 
repeat the process later. By celebrating your achievement you give yourself 
the motivation for the next new task. 

We have just spent some time discussing learning preferences and 
how concentration is important if you wish to retain information. In order to 
remember information concentration is very important, however it's now time 
to see how memory works in more detail. 

189 


Your Memory: 


Whether you know it or not you possess a fantastic memory right now. 
Some of you might doubt this but I can assure you it's perfectly true. There 
are many reasons why people think that they have a poor memory but this is 
only because they haven't been told how the memory works. 

If you haven't been shown the techniques you can use to boost your 
memory you will never understand what you are truly capable of and be able 
to tap into the incredible power of your mind. 

Try to imagine for a moment what a terrific memory would do for you 
and your life. Being able to remember the names of your clients having met 
them only once or it might be enough to be able to reel off facts and figures 
whenever you need them. Or maybe you want to learn a foreign language. It 
does not matter what you do in life, a good memory is always a real asset. 

The subject of memory has fascinated philosophers and scientists for 
thousands of years. At around 400 BC the Greek philosopher Plato set down 
one of the first hypotheses about memory. He believed that the mind or the 
memory functions in a similar way to a wax tablet, which is what they used to 
write on in those days. When you write on a wax tablet you scratch small 
amounts of wax off the smooth surface. If you wish to re-use the tablet, you 
can simply smooth the wax over and start again. Plato believed that many 
remembered things made small indentations in the mind and that in time 
these marks would disappear and become smooth again. This would mean 
that we forgot things. 

One of the greatest contributions to the study of memory was made by 
Plato’s famous student Aristotle. He noticed that memory functions by 
association and we will be going in to this in great detail next month. 
Aristotle thought that our memories were contained in the heart, and 
although we know this is not true it wasn't until the 18th century that we 
discovered that the brain was responsible for memory. 

The human brain contains billions of nerve cells called neurones. They 
communicate with each other through chemical and electrical messages. The 
number of interactions that are theoretically possible is astronomical, some 
say the number would be greater than the total number of atoms within the 
whole universe! 

All memories are somehow encoded and stored in our brain. They are 
transmitted across minuscule gaps between the neurones along minute 
