In the 1960s Ann Baker started with a regular non-pedigreed white domestic longhaired Angora-kind cat named Josephine, who had produced several litters of typical cats. This cat was injured in an accident involving a car and taken to the veterinary hospital at the University of California. Josephine was of a Persian/Angora type and had litters sired by several unknown male Birman cats, one of which had the Siamese point coloration. Baker believed that Josephine was subject to a secret government genetic experiment during treatment at the lab, and claimed that it made Josephine docile, relaxed when picked up, and immune to pain. Another claim from her was that the kittens were so relaxed because their mother had a car accident while she was pregnant. (None of these claims has been found to have any basis in fact whatsoever.) After Josephine recovered, she produced kittens with the easy going temperament. When the subsequent litter produced more of the same, Ann Baker purchased several kittens from the owner, who lived behind her, and believing she had something special, set out to create what is now known as the Ragdoll. The breed was selectively bred over many years for desirable traits, such as large size, gentle demeanor, and a tendency to go limp when picked up, as well as the striking pointed coloration.[2]

Out of those early litters came Blackie, an all black Burmese-like male and Daddy Warbucks, a seal point with white feet. Daddy Warbucks sired the founding bi-color female Fugianna, and Blackie sired Buckwheat, a dark brown/black Burmese-like female. Both Fugianna and Buckwheat were daughters of Josephine. All Ragdolls are descended from Baker's cats through matings of Daddy Warbucks to Fugianna and Buckwheat.

Baker, in an unusual move, spurned traditional cat breeding associations. She trademarked the name "Ragdoll," set up her own registry—International Ragdoll Cat Association (IRCA)—and enforced stringent standards on anyone who wanted to breed or sell cats under that name.[2] The Ragdolls were also not allowed to be registered in other breed associations. In 1975, a group led by Denny Dayton broke rank with IRCA with the aim of gaining mainstream recognition for the Ragdoll. This group eventually developed the Ragdoll standard currently accepted by major cat registries.

Since the spread of the Ragdoll breed in America during the early 1960s a breeding pair of Ragdolls was exported to the UK. This was followed by eight more cats to fully establish the breed in the UK, where it is recognised by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy[3]

In 1994, a second group decided to leave the IRCA and form their own group due to increasingly strict breeding restrictions. This group later established the Ragamuffin breed. Because Baker owned the rights to the name "Ragdoll", no offshoot groups could call their cats Ragdolls until the trademark on "Ragdoll" was not renewed in 2005.[4]
Is This The Breed For Me?

If you want a large cat which is non-aggressive, loves to be with people, and is very placid, you may want to consider a Ragdoll. Also, if you love the look of a long-haired cat, but do not want the constant grooming associated with breeds such as the Persian, a Ragdoll would be a good choice. The gentle Ragdoll is also good with children and is easy to introduce into a multi-pet household.

If you want a very active or talkative cat, then you might not be happy with the less-active Ragdoll.

DGC Samazmo of DJ's Fancy Free, a seal mitted Ragdoll. Image Copyright 1995 Ed Ausevich.
Physical Description

(This is an informal description. Precise breed standards are available from the various associations. If you plan to show or breed your Ragdoll, you should obtain breed standards from the associations in which you want to show, and read them carefully.)

Ragdolls are large, heavy cats, with broad chests and large hindquarters. They are slow-maturing, and do not reach full maturity until approximately three years of age. Females are smaller than males, weighing about 10-15 pounds on average. Males weigh an average of 12-20 pounds as adults, although some may grow to be larger.

Ragdolls have large, oval, blue eyes and sweet expressions. Their large, rounded ears are set with a slight forward tilt. They have a curved profile with the look of a "ski slope" as it merges to the top of the head.

Their medium-long coats and bushy tails have a soft texture that feels like rabbit fur. In general, Ragdolls have longer fur around the neck (a "ruff") and on the back of the hindquarters (sometimes referred to as "britches"). The fur does not tend to mat, and is easily combed. It does, however, require occasional grooming.

Ragdolls are pointed cats. Like other pointed breeds such as the Himalayan and Siamese, Ragdoll kittens are born all white and slowly develop color. The color continues to deepen as the cat ages.

In most associations, Ragdolls are accepted in 3 patterns and 4 colors. The three patterns are "colorpoint," "mitted," and "bicolor":

    A "colorpoint" has dark points (ears, tail, face, and feet) with a body of a lighter shade. The nose leather and pawpads match the point color. Colorpoints do not have white markings (although the pale body color may appear white on some cats).
    A "mitted" has dark points and lighter body like a colorpoint, but also has white "mitts" on the front paws, white "boots" on the back legs and feet, a white chin, a white strip on the stomach, and a white ruff.
    A "bi-color" has the dark points (ears and tail), but the mask is interrupted by an inverted "V" running between the eyes and expanding into the muzzle. The body color forms a "saddle" on the cat's back and the remainder of the cat is white. Bi-colors have pink nose leather and paw pads. 

The four colors are "seal," "chocolate," "blue," and "lilac" (also known as "frost"):

    A "seal" has dark seal brown points with a light tan body color.
    A "chocolate" has milk chocolate points with an ivory body color.
    A "blue" has dark gray points with a pale gray body color.
    A "lilac" has pinkish gray points with a frosty white body color. 

To describe a Ragdoll, combine the color and pattern names. For example, a seal Ragdoll, depending on the pattern, might be a "seal colorpoint," "seal mitted," or "seal bi-color."

Narragansett Lily, a seal mitted Ragdoll. Image Copyright 1994 Carolyn Gilbert.
Characteristics and Temperament

Ragdolls (as their name implies) are extremely "laid-back," docile, non-aggressive cats. They tend to relax when held. They are said to possess a non-fighting instinct, which means that if attacked, they do not defend themselves. They are very "people" oriented and love to be around others, which often finds them greeting guests and/or following their owners around in a fashion similar to a puppy. They are often quite an attraction in a show ring because of their docile dispositions and acceptance of the judge placing them on their backs, holding them like a baby, etc.

In general, Ragdolls are not extremely vocal, but they do voice their opinions concerning certain things (such as at mealtime!). Ragdolls are generally placid cats, but they do love to play with all types of toys and like to be involved in whatever "action" is going on.
Care and Training

Ragdolls are intelligent and like to please their owners. Training Ragdolls is much more successful when done with rewards. For example, they can be trained easily to use a scratching post instead of your furniture by lavishing attention on them whenever they use the post. As with most cats, however, Ragdolls can be their "own boss" if they so choose!

They do not shed excessively, and need little care to keep their coats in good condition. Their soft, rabbit-like fur does not tend to mat. The fur does require occasional combing or brushing, and the longer fur around the hindquarters should be combed regularly. In general, Ragdolls do not mind being groomed and, in fact, often enjoy the grooming sessions.

Because Ragdolls lack the instinct to defend themselves when attacked, they must be kept as indoor pets only. However, they can be easily leash trained so that they can go for walks with you outside.

Otherwise, good food, fresh water, regular vet-checkups, regular vaccinations and lots of love is what they need to thrive. Bits of fresh raw beef can also be fed, as it helps clean the teeth and gives good nutrients, but be *very* sure of your supplier before doing this!
Special Medical Concerns

No specific medical conditions have been noted with this breed. However, as with all breeds, certain "lines" might have a tendency toward specific health problems. It's probably a good idea to talk to the breeder about whether his/her cats come from lines with any health risks.
Brief History

In the early 1960's, a woman from California named Ann Baker created the Ragdoll by breeding a white female Persian to a male Birman. She then introduced a female Burmese into the breeding program. This combination resulted in the Ragdoll breed. She then founded the IRCA organization in approximately 1971, which had very stringent "rules" for owners of her cats. The IRCA still exists, but Ragdolls produced by the IRCA are not accepted in any major association.

Fortunately, a husband and wife team bought a pair of the original IRCA Ragdolls and realized that this breed needed to be standardized, shown, and accepted by the various associations in the cat fancy. They worked on an extensive, selective breeding program, out of which grew the standardized Ragdolls. The Ragdoll Fanciers' Club International (RFCI) was then formed to promote the breed and set specific guidelines for Ragdoll breeders.

RFCI Ragdolls are bred Ragdoll to Ragdoll only, with no outcrossing to any other breeds. They have specific breed standards, to which the breeders must adhere. RFCI Ragdolls are now accepted for registration in all cat registering associations.
Recognition

RFCI Ragdolls have championship status in all associations except CFA. In CFA, the bi-colors may be shown in the miscellaneous class, and the colorpoint and mitted patterns can be registered but not shown. Ragdolls have done well in the associations in which they are accepted. The Number 1 Inter-American Alter for the 1992-93 show season in ACFA was a blue bi-color Ragdoll, which exemplifies the beauty and appeal of this breed.

The IRCA Ragdolls are not accepted in any association (except IRCA).
Breed Club

The Ragdoll Fanciers' Club International (RFCI) is the breed club for registrable Ragdolls. This club works with all the major cat registering associations to further the Ragdoll breed. It puts out a newsletter, Ragdoll World, and gives year-end awards for the highest scoring Ragdolls, regardless of what association they are shown in.

    President: Wain Pearce
    Secretary: Nancy Gellerman 

There are also Regional Directors who can be contacted. The RFCI secretary would be able to help you with this information.
Breeders

You can contact the RFCI for more information on Ragdolls or for a list of registered RFCI breeders. You can also speak with breeders at cat shows. Ragdolls are more commonly seen at TICA or ACFA shows.
The cat (Felis catus), also known as the domestic cat or housecat[5] to distinguish it from other felids and felines, is a small, usually furry, domesticated, carnivorous mammal that is valued by humans for its companionship and for its ability to hunt vermin and household pests. Cats have been associated with humans for at least 9,500 years,[6] and are currently the most popular pet in the world.[7] Owing to their close association with humans, cats are now found almost everywhere in the world.

Cats are similar in anatomy to the other felids, with strong, flexible bodies, quick reflexes, sharp retractable claws, and teeth adapted to killing small prey. As nocturnal predators, cats use their acute hearing and ability to see in near darkness to locate prey. Not only can cats hear sounds too faint for human ears, they can also hear sounds higher in frequency than humans can perceive. This is because the usual prey of cats (particularly rodents such as mice) make high frequency noises, so the hearing of the cat has evolved to pinpoint these faint high-pitched sounds. Cats also have a much better sense of smell than humans.

Despite being solitary hunters, cats are a social species and use a variety of vocalizations, pheromones and types of body language for communication. These include meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, and grunting.[8]

Cats have a rapid breeding rate. Under controlled breeding, they can be bred and shown as registered pedigree pets, a hobby known as cat fancy. Failure to control the breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering and the abandonment of former household pets has resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide, with a population of up to 60 million of these animals in the United States alone.[9]

As The New York Times wrote in 2007, "Until recently the cat was commonly believed to have been domesticated in ancient Egypt, where it was a cult animal",[10] but a study that year revealed that the lines of descent of all house cats probably run through as few as five self-domesticating African Wildcats (Felis silvestris lybica) c. 8000 BC, in the Near East.[4] The earliest direct evidence of cat domestication is a kitten that was buried alongside a human 9,500 years ago in Cyprus.[11]
The word cat derives from Old English catt, which belongs to a group of related words in European languages, including Welsh cath, Spanish gato, French chat (French pronunciation: [?a])[12], Basque katu, Byzantine Greek ????? kátia, Old Irish cat, Frisian and Dutch kat, German Katze, Armenian katu, and Old Church Slavonic kotka. The ultimate source of all these terms is Late Latin catus, cattus, catta "domestic cat", as opposed to feles 'European wildcat'. It is unclear whether the Greek or the Latin came first, but, like Arabic qi?? and Nubian kàdíís, they were undoubtedly borrowed from a word in an Afro-Asiatic language akin to Berber kaddîska, meaning 'wildcat'.[13] The term puss (as in pussycat) may come from Dutch poes or from Low German Puuskatte, dialectal Swedish kattepus, or Norwegian pus, pusekatt, all of which primarily denote a woman and, by extension, a female cat.[14]
Classification based on human interaction[15] Population 	Food source 	Shelter 	Socialized
Pedigree 	Fed by owner 	Human homes 	Yes
Pet 	Fed by owner 	Human homes 	Yes
Semi-feral 	General feeding 	Buildings 	Yes
Feral 	General feeding/foraging 	Buildings 	No
Pseudo-wildcat 	Foraging/hunting 	None 	No

While wildcats are the ancestral species from which domestic cats are descended, there are several intermediate stages between domestic pet and pedigree cats and these entirely wild cats. The semi-feral cat is a cat that is not owned by any one individual, but is generally friendly to people and may be fed by several households. Feral cats are associated with human habitations and may be fed by people or forage in rubbish, but are wary of human interaction. Pseudo-wildcats are descended from domestic cats, but now tend to live entirely independently from people.[15]

A group of cats is referred to as a "clowder", a male cat is called a "tom" (or a "gib", if neutered), and a female is called a "molly" or "queen". The male progenitor of a cat, especially a pedigreed cat, is its "sire", and its female progenitor is its "dam". An immature cat is called a "kitten" (which is also an alternative name for young rats, rabbits, hedgehogs, beavers, squirrels and skunks).

In medieval Britain, the word kitten was interchangeable with the word catling. A cat whose ancestry is formally registered is called a pedigreed cat, purebred cat, or a show cat. In strict terms, a pure-bred cat is one whose ancestry contains only individuals of the same breed. A pedigreed cat is one whose ancestry is recorded, but may have ancestors of different breeds. Cats of unrecorded mixed ancestry are referred to as domestic longhairs and domestic shorthairs or commonly as random-bred, moggies, mongrels, or mutt-cats.
Taxonomy and evolution

    Main article: Cat evolution

The wildcat Felis silvestris is a close relative and possible ancestor of the domestic cat.

The Felids are a rapidly evolving family of mammals that share a common ancestor only 10–15 million years ago,[16] and include, in addition to the domestic cat, lions, tigers, cougars, and many others. Within this family, domestic cats (Felis catus) are part of the genus Felis, which is a group of small cats containing seven species.[1][17] Members of the genus are found worldwide and include the Jungle Cat (Felis chaus) of southeast Asia, the African Wildcat (Felis silvestris lybica), the Chinese Mountain Cat (Felis silvestris bieti) and the Arabian Sand Cat (Felis margarita).[18]

All the cats in this genus share a common ancestor that probably lived around 6–7 million years ago in Asia.[19] Although the exact relationships within the Felidae are still uncertain,[20][21] both the Chinese Mountain Cat and the African Wildcat are close relations of the domestic cat and are both classed as subspecies of the Wildcat Felis silvestris.[4][20] As domestic cats are little altered from wildcats, they can readily interbreed. This hybridization may pose a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of wildcat populations, particularly in Scotland and Hungary.[22]

The domestic cat was first classified as Felis catus by Carolus Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae of 1758.[2][23] However, because of modern phylogenetics, domestic cats are now usually regarded as another subspecies of the Wildcat Felis silvestris.[4][23][24] This has resulted in mixed usage of the terms, as the domestic cat can be called by its subspecies name, Felis silvestris catus.[1][4] Wildcats have also been referred to as various subspecies of F. catus,[24] but in 2003 the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature fixed the name for wildcats as F. silvestris.[25] The most common name in use for the domestic cat remains F. catus, following a convention for domesticated animals of using the earliest (the senior) synonym proposed.[25] Sometimes the domestic cat is called Felis domesticus[26] or Felis domestica,[23] the term coined by German naturalist Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777. These are not valid taxonomic names, and Linnaeus' binomial takes precedence.[27]

Cats have either a mutualistic or commensal relationship with humans. However, in comparison to dogs, cats have not undergone major changes during the domestication process, as the form and behavior of the domestic cat are not radically different from those of wildcats, and domestic cats are perfectly capable of surviving in the wild.[28][29] This limited evolution during domestication means that domestic cats tend to interbreed freely with feral cats, which distinguishes them from other domesticated animals.[15] However, several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have preadapted them for domestication as pets.[29] These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play and relatively high intelligence;[30] they may also have an inborn tendency towards tameness.[29]

There are two main theories about how cats were domesticated. In one, people deliberately tamed cats in a process of artificial selection, as they were useful predators of vermin.[31] However, this has been criticized as implausible, because there may have been little reward for such an effort: cats do not carry out commands and, although they do eat rodents, other species such as ferrets or terriers may be better at controlling these pests.[4] The alternative idea is that cats were simply tolerated by people and gradually diverged from their 'wild' relatives through natural selection, as they adapted to hunting the vermin found around humans in towns and villages.[4]
Ragdoll breeders are also listed in such magazines as "Cat Fancy" and "Cats Magazine". Be cautious as to whether you are contacting an IRCA breeder or a breeder who produces the standardized, registerable (RFCI) Ragdolls. When looking at the breeders' advertisements in periodicals such as "Cat Fancy" or "Cats Magazine," note that the RFCI Ragdolls are listed with the other breeds, but the IRCA Ragdolls are listed in a separate area apart from the other breeds. To acquire a standardized, registerable Ragdoll, consult the RFCI breeders section. 
History

In the 1960s Ann Baker started with a regular non-pedigreed white domestic longhaired Angora-kind cat named Josephine, who had produced several litters of typical cats. This cat was injured in an accident involving a car and taken to the veterinary hospital at the University of California. Josephine was of a Persian/Angora type and had litters sired by several unknown male Birman cats, one of which had the Siamese point coloration. Baker believed that Josephine was subject to a secret government genetic experiment during treatment at the lab, and claimed that it made Josephine docile, relaxed when picked up, and immune to pain. Another claim from her was that the kittens were so relaxed because their mother had a car accident while she was pregnant. (None of these claims has been found to have any basis in fact whatsoever.) After Josephine recovered, she produced kittens with the easy going temperament. When the subsequent litter produced more of the same, Ann Baker purchased several kittens from the owner, who lived behind her, and believing she had something special, set out to create what is now known as the Ragdoll. The breed was selectively bred over many years for desirable traits, such as large size, gentle demeanor, and a tendency to go limp when picked up, as well as the striking pointed coloration.[2]

Out of those early litters came Blackie, an all black Burmese-like male and Daddy Warbucks, a seal point with white feet. Daddy Warbucks sired the founding bi-color female Fugianna, and Blackie sired Buckwheat, a dark brown/black Burmese-like female. Both Fugianna and Buckwheat were daughters of Josephine. All Ragdolls are descended from Baker's cats through matings of Daddy Warbucks to Fugianna and Buckwheat.

Baker, in an unusual move, spurned traditional cat breeding associations. She trademarked the name "Ragdoll," set up her own registry—International Ragdoll Cat Association (IRCA)—and enforced stringent standards on anyone who wanted to breed or sell cats under that name.[2] The Ragdolls were also not allowed to be registered in other breed associations. In 1975, a group led by Denny Dayton broke rank with IRCA with the aim of gaining mainstream recognition for the Ragdoll. This group eventually developed the Ragdoll standard currently accepted by major cat registries.

Since the spread of the Ragdoll breed in America during the early 1960s a breeding pair of Ragdolls was exported to the UK. This was followed by eight more cats to fully establish the breed in the UK, where it is recognised by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy[3]

In 1994, a second group decided to leave the IRCA and form their own group due to increasingly strict breeding restrictions. This group later established the Ragamuffin breed. Because Baker owned the rights to the name "Ragdoll", no offshoot groups could call their cats Ragdolls until the trademark on "Ragdoll" was not renewed in 2005.[4]
The docile and floppy nature of the Ragdoll is a characteristic thought to be passed down from the Persian and Siamese breed. There are contrary statements on whether this trait might be the result of genetic mutation.[5][6] The extreme docility of some individuals have led to the myth that Ragdolls are pain-resistant. Some breeders in Britain have tried to breed away from the limpness due to concerns that extreme docility "might not be in the best interests of the cat." [5][7] There have been multiple reports of ragdolls nonchalantly approaching moving cars and vicious dogs and getting hurt. Breed standards describe the Ragdoll as affectionate, intelligent, relaxed in temperament, gentle and easy to handle.[8][9]
The Ragdoll is one of the largest domesticated cat breeds with a sturdy body, large frame and proportionate legs. A fully-grown female weighs from 8 pounds (3.6 kg) to 15 pounds (6.8 kg). Males are substantially larger, ranging from 12 pounds (5.4 kg) to 20 pounds (9.1 kg)[2] or more. The genes for point coloration are also responsible for the blue eyes of the Ragdoll. More intense shades of blue are favored in the cat shows. Though the breed has a plush coat, this coat consists mainly of long guard hairs, while the lack of a dense undercoat results in, according to the Cat Fanciers' Association, "reduced shedding and matting." [10] Mitted Ragdolls, which weren't allowed titling until the '08-'09 show season, will often be confused for Birmans. The easiest way to tell the difference is by size (the Ragdoll being obviously larger) and chin color (Ragdolls have white chins, while Birmans have colored chins), although breeders recognize the two by head shape and boning.
The Ragdoll has a "pointed" coat colour, meaning that like a Siamese, the extremities are darker than the torso. Ragdolls come in six different colours - seal, (brown points); blue (gray points); flame (orange points); and their corresponding "dilutes" or pastel shades - chocolate, lilac and cream points. A "tortie-point" is a mottled variation, and would have any 2 of these colours, and is always female. A lynxpoint includes the striping found on a classic tabby cat but only visible to varying degrees on the points or extremities. Other colours such as minks or solid Ragdolls are not yet fully accepted by registering cat associations for show purposes in the Ragdoll category. Ragdoll kittens are all born white. They gradually darken and have representative color at 8 – 10 weeks and full colour and coat at 3 – 4 years. There are three different patterns:
The Birman is a domestic cat breed. Also called the "Sacred Cat of Burma",[1] it is not to be confused with the Burmese, which is a separate and dissimilar breed. The Birman has medium-long hair, a pale colored body and darker points with deep blue eyes. Even though the cat is pointed, the paws have white gloves.

Birmanie is the French spelling of Burma. The Birman breed was first recognized in France by the Cat Club de France in 1925, then in England by the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy[2] (GCCF) in 1966 and in United States by the Cat Fanciers' Association[1] (CFA) in 1967. It is also recognized by the Canadian Cat Association (CCA), and by The International Cat Association[3] (TICA) in 1979.
The first traces of historical Birmans go back to a Mme Leotardi[7] in the city of Nice in France.

Birmans were almost wiped out as a breed during World War II. Only two cats were alive in Europe at the end of the war, a pair named Orloff and Xenia de Kaabaa, both belonging to Baudoin-Crevoisier. The foundation of the breed in postwar France were offspring of this pair. They had to be heavily outcrossed with long-hair breeds such as Persian and Siamese to rebuild the Birman breed. By the early 1950s, pure Birman litters were once again being produced. The restored breed was recognized in Britain in 1965 and by the CFA in 1966.[citation needed]

The first Birman cats were seal-point. The Blue-point color was introduced in 1959 using Blue Persian lines. New colors were added by the work of English Breeders in the 1970-1980 including chocolate, red-point, and the tabby/lynx version.[citation needed] A Birman was also used to create new breeds like the Ragdoll cat in California.[citation needed]
Birmans have semi-long, silky hair, a semi-cobby body and relatively small ears compared to other cat races and a Roman nose. In order to comply with breed standards, the Birman's body should be of an eggshell colour or golden, depending on the intensity of the markings colour. The markings can be pure seal, chocolate, blue, red, lilac or cream. Tabby variations are also allowed. Tortie cats can be seal, chocolate, blue or lilac. Birmans have sapphire coloured eyes.

The Birman's coat is unusual due to the white 'gloves' on each paw. They are one of the few cat breeds in the colourpoint coat that has fingers and toes in pure white colour. The genetics of this feature may not be not fully clear, though a gene conferring the white 'gloves' has been identified.[citation needed]

Points of Birman are: Seal-point, Blue-point, Chocolate-point, Lilac-point, Seal Tortie-point, Cream-point, Blue Cream point, Chocolate Tortie point, Lilac Tortie point. The same colours in Tabby version (Lynx): Seal Tabby point, Blue Tabby point, Chocolate Tabby point, Lilac Tabby point, Red Tabby, Cream Tabby point, Tortie Tabby point. Lynx or Red Factor colors on the legs, tail and face. The same colors exist in Silver/Smoke version while not yet recognize by all clubs. Birmans differ from conventional colour-point cats by their white paws called gloves. The coat is medium-length, not as long and thick as a Persian's, and does not mat. A notable feature is their blue eyes which remain blue throughout their life. Australian breeders have been recently working on new colors like: Cinnamon point, fawn point.

The only allowed white areas are gloves. A spot of white in another area is a fault in a Birman cat. Gloves are symmetrical in all four feet. The white must stop at the articulation or at the transition of toes to metacarpals; and all fingers must be white too. The posterior gloves on the back paws finish with an inverted V extended 1/2" to 3/4".
The Persian is a longhaired cat characterized by its round face and shortened muzzle. Its name refers to Persia, the former name of Iran, where similar cats are found. Recognized by the cat fancy since the late 19th century, it was developed first by the English, and then mainly by American breeders after the Second World War. In Britain, it is called the Longhair or Persian Longhair.

The selective breeding carried out by breeders has allowed the development of a wide variety of coat colors, but has also led to the creation of increasingly flat-faced Persians. Favored by fanciers, this head structure can bring with it a number of health problems. As is the case with the Siamese breed, there have been efforts by some breeders to preserve the older type of cat with a more pronounced muzzle, which is more popular with the general public. The hereditary polycystic kidney disease is prevalent in the breed, affecting almost half the population in some countries.

The placid and unpretentious nature of the Persian confers a propensity for apartment living. It has been the most popular breed in the United States for many years but its popularity has seen a decline in Britain and France.
The first Persian was presented at a cat show at the Crystal Palace in London, England in 1871. As specimens closer to the Persian conformation became the more popular types, attempts were made to differentiate it from the Angora.[2] The first breed standards (then known as points of excellence) was issued in 1889 by Harrison Weir, the creator of the first cat show. He stated that the Persian differed from the Angora in the tail being longer, hair more full and coarse at the end and head larger, with less pointed ears.[4] Not all cat fanciers agree with the distinction of the two types and in the 1903 book "The Book of the Cat" Francis Simpson states that "the distinctions, apparently with hardly any difference, between Angoras and Persians are of so fine a nature that I must be pardoned if I ignore the class of cat commonly called Angora".[5]

e.[15]
I spoke to my mother, who pretended that she wasn’t disappointed that I wasn’t coming home directly. I
explained my situation as best I could—the telephone was in a cranny without a door, and I knew that
anyone passing or standing in Reception just around the corner could hear every word—and I asked if she’d
forgive me for putting Lydia first.
“Yes, of course I will. But when were you invited? I didn’t quite understand?”
“I ran into someone in London and came down to Sussex with her. A family member died recently, and
the stone for his grave is ready to be set in place. The rest of the Ellis family is expected today for a small
ceremony. They’d like me to stay.”
“Darling, I didn’t know you were acquainted with anyone in that part of Sussex. Are you quite sure you’ve
told me everything, Bess, dear?”
“This telephone is in a very public place. Please, ask Simon. He can explain this far better than I, just
now.”
“I don’t know that he’s at the cottage just now. He and your father went off together, and the Colonel Sahib
hasn’t returned.”
“I’ll write,” I said. I had half an hour, I could find hotel stationery and send a short note. “Will that do?”
Although any letter would reach Somerset after I did.
“Darling, don’t worry about it. You’ll be home in a few more days. We can talk then, shall we? You sound
tired and more than a little anxious. A party might be just the thing.”
Depend on my mother to put the best face possible on any situation.
“Thank you,” I replied, utterly sincere. “I’ll still write.”
I rang off.
Finding hotel stationery was simple enough, and I had a pen with me. Finding a quiet corner to sit in was
another matter. It was nearly eleven, and people were coming and going as if this were the hub of activity in
the town.
I sat down on a window seat overlooking the street and made an attempt to explain how and why I’d found
myself in Sussex instead of Somerset. It was not my best effort, but it would have to do. I wrote my parents’
direction on the envelope, and was about to ask Reception where I could find the post office, when I noticed
the door of Bluebell Cottage opening and a man stepping out into the street.
He was holding a cane, using it to find his way, as if he had done this a thousand times and knew where
he was. Turning to his right, he moved carefully but confidently along the pavement, and people passing him
greeted him as if he were fairly well known.
In spite of the hat he wore pulled down to conceal his scars and blind eyes, I could see that he had good
bones, a firm chin, and dark brows. Not precisely handsome, but what my mother would call a good face.
In front of the greengrocer’s shop stood another man in a threadbare, ragged coat two sizes too large for
his thin frame, and the shoes on his feet were worn almost to the point of the leather cracking open. I thought
perhaps he’d been begging, because as I watched, I saw the greengrocer come out his door and angrily tell
him to move on. He shuffled along to the ironmonger’s shop and stopped again. Then he looked up, saw the
blind man coming his way, and waited until he was close enough to speak to.
I couldn’t hear the conversation of course, but it was obvious the poor man was asking for money. The
blind man nodded, reached into his pocket, and took out some coins, dropping them into the grimy,
outstretched hand. The beggar touched his cap in gratitude, his thanks following the blind man as he walked
on. Watching this interaction, I’d nearly forgot my letter, and made haste to walk on to speak to the desk clerk.
I was halfway there when I all but collided with Roger Ellis coming out of a small parlor just off Reception. I
wondered for a fraction of a second if he’d been in a position to overhear my telephone conversation.
“Going somewhere?” he asked, and I knew then that from the parlor window he must also have seen the
occupant of Bluebell Cottage walking down the street.
“Yes,” I told him. “I was in a hurry to mail this letter before it was time to meet you.” I held up the envelope,
addressed and sealed but without a stamp. “Do you suppose we could stop at the post office?”
I watched him scan the address. “Of course,” he said, and we moved outside again into the chill
December. He opened the door of his motorcar for me, and I noticed over his shoulder that the blind man
had disappeared from view. But I saw the beggar stopping another man in front of the pub farther along the
street.
We paused at the post office, I purchased a stamp, and my letter was dropped into His Majesty’s red
post box. We drove back to the main street and headed toward the Forest. We had nearly reached the
outskirts of Hartfield when we both saw the occupant of Bluebell Cottage about to cross the street. But
Roger Ellis hadn’t slowed his speed, and I thought for a moment he intended to knock the man down.
Someone just behind the blind man caught his arm and spoke to him, and then we were past.
“That was cruel,” I snapped. “You could have hurt him.”
“I doubt it. I’ve had a feeling his vision has improved more than he was willing to acknowledge. I’ve
watched him walk through the town before this, and he has an uncanny ability to avoid obstacles.”
“Why should he lie? It’s familiarity that guides him, and remembering the number of steps to this or that
place. Besides, however good his vision may be, what right do you have to test it by frightening the man?”
“Yes, all right, I’m sorry,” Ellis said. “I thought when you first came through the hotel door with that letter in
your hand that you were taking it across to his cottage. I was angry.”
“I showed it to you. It was to my parents.”
“But you just spoke to them on the telephone, did you not?”
Exasperated, I said, “I did. And I promised my mother I’d write a note as well. Do you know where that
telephone is? Hardly the place for a private conversation of any kind. How could I tell her that I was worried
about Lydia having a concussion, without also telling the entire village as well?”
“I apologize,” he said again. “It’s my shoulder. It hurts like the devil in this weather and after a while it
begins to make me short-tempered.”
I didn’t know if that were true or an excuse for his behavior. I said only, “Where were you wounded?” Lydia
had told me it had happened soon after he reached France.
“Near Mons. It’s healed well enough, and I have full use of it again. But it’s an excellent barometer. I’m told
there are still several shards of shrapnel they couldn’t reach without doing more damage.”
“Yes, that’s often a problem,” I agreed. “Although I’m told the American Base Hospital in Rouen has an Xray
machine that allows them to locate shrapnel exactly and that makes the surgery far less invasive. I don’t
know whether your shoulder will improve with time or not. But you might speak to someone there if it
continues to trouble you.” It was a professional assessment, not meant as a personal judgment.
“I’ll manage,” he retorted.
“Yes, I’m sure you will,” I answered, biting my tongue. Lydia was right about the fact that this man was
moody and unpredictable. I let the silence between us lengthen.
I was glad to see the turning for Vixen Hill as we came down the muddy track, bouncing and shuddering in
the ruts. It couldn’t have helped either Roger Ellis’s shoulder or his disposition.
I went directly to my room, took off my hat and coat, and sat down by the window for a moment. Trying to
imagine how the knot garden must look in summer helped to take the edge off my own mood. It seemed to
me that Lydia and her husband had lost the happiness that must have marked the beginning of their
marriage, and I wasn’t sure they could find their way back to it now. But at least now I could better
understand her reluctance to come home on her own. And I pitied both of them. What troubled me was
whether my presence aggravated Roger Ellis’s sullenness for reasons I couldn’t quite fathom, or if
something else was bothering him.
With a sigh I rose from the window to look in on Lydia. But before I could open my door there was a light
tap, and then Lydia stepped in.
“Roger is looking decidedly sheepish. What did you say to him?”
I thought about our conversations, about the occupant of Bluebell Cottage, and Roger Ellis’s suspicious
nature. Hardly something I could pass on to Lydia.
Instead I said, “I’d written a brief note to my mother, and when your husband saw it in my hand, he thought I
was carrying a message from you to the occupant of Bluebell Cottage. By the time he realized his mistake, I
could see that he was more than a little jealous. Have you given him cause to be?”
She threw up her hands in disgust. “That’s Gran’s doing. I volunteered to read to Davis Merrit. In fact, it
was Mr. Harris, the rector, who asked if I had the time to come and read to him. And I’ll be honest, I enjoyed
it. He’s an interesting man—Lieutenant Merrit—and the books he chooses interest me as well. Gran
disapproves, and it was she who put the idea into Roger’s head that there might be more to those weekly
afternoons than meets the eye. No, I’m not in love with Davis. Nor he with me. I suppose we’re both lonely,
and there’s comfort in companionship. Such as it is.”
But sometimes loneliness led to something more. And pity could change to compassion, and
compassion to love. Still, if it was true that Gran had made more of a kindness than was justified by the
facts, it would have been wise for Lydia to see less of Merrit for the time being.
I said as much, and she replied, “Yes, I expect you’re right. But it seemed unnecessarily cruel to Davis to
punish him just because such things were very different in Gran’s day. After all, we don’t meet in the cottage,
we sit in the Rectory or sometimes he arranges for a parlor at The King’s Head. It’s all very proper.”
“I’ve seen him, Lydia. He’s rather attractive. And you’re vulnerable, with Roger away for so many years.”
She glared at me. “If I were intending to have an affair,” she said, the ring of truth in her voice, “I’d look for
someone in London. Far away from Ashdown Forest. Davis is the frying pan to Roger’s fire.”
“You knew what the heath was like, didn’t you? When you married Roger?”
“I thought I did. Roger had brought me here before we were married, and of course I was in love and this
was his home. I hadn’t seen it in the depths of winter.” She smiled at a memory. “On my first visit, I found a
nest of mice under a gorse bush. Tiny things, hardly as big as my thumb. I watched them for a quarter of an
hour. It seemed magical. I’d never found mice in Bury St. Edmunds.”
I laughed. “No, I expect not. Shall we go? Mrs. Ellis must be waiting for me to help with the bed in the blue
room. I promised we’d see to it as soon as I returned from Hartfield.”
“Yes, and I’ve left the silver teapot half polished.” She sighed. “Alan wouldn’t have cared for all this fuss,
but I know how much it means to his mother. And it’s given her something to keep her mind occupied.” She
shivered. “You’d have liked Alan, Bess. He could make you laugh at nothing, and he had the loveliest
baritone voice. It was a pleasure to listen to him sing.” As we walked toward the stairs, she added, “Before
he went to join his ship in 1914, he put all his affairs in order. I wondered if he had a premonition that he
might not be coming back.”
The first of the guests were expected in time for tea. It was a little later than that when I heard a motorcar on
the drive. By the time I’d looked out, I couldn’t see who had arrived. I smiled to myself, thinking that it was too
soon for the Colonel Sahib to appear in full dress uniform and a battalion of Household Cavalry at his back.
Or at the very least prepared to deploy the full force of his charm. It could be formidable.
A few moments later, Daisy, flushed with excitement, hurried into the library where I was folding the ironed
table linens on the wide desk there to tell me that someone had called to see me.
“To see me?” I repeated. The Colonel Sahib after all.
But it was Simon standing in the hall.
“I should have known. Wild horses couldn’t have kept you away. I’m sorry that you’ve made the journey for
nothing. I spoke to my mother this morning. I won’t be coming home until Sunday.”
“I was sent for from Sandhurst,” he said, and I knew not to ask why. “I stopped at Mrs. Hennessey’s when I
got back to London, and read your message. Knowing you, I asked her to pack several dresses for you to
wear for dinner. According to her, you’d brought only one with you.”
“Did Mother tell you I was staying over?”
He laughed. “She didn’t need to tell me. I had a feeling you’d succumb to pleading. All right, where shall I
take your fripperies?”
“You only came to be sure this wasn’t a den of iniquity,” I retorted. But I was inordinately glad to see him.
We carried the valise up the stairs to my room, and as he walked into it he said, “Much more cheerful than
the hall.”
“Yes, I thought so as well.” We deposited the valise by the wardrobe.
He glanced at the open door, then crossed the room to close it.
“Are you all right, Bess? You know nothing about these people, after all.”
“Apparently Lydia’s father-in-law had met the Colonel Sahib out in India. That practically makes me one of
the family.”
He smiled but wasn’t put off by my humor.
“You can’t manage all this”—his hand swept over the two valises, the one I’d taken with me and the one
he’d brought—“on a train. I’ll come for you. Or the Colonel will. Is there a telephone here in the house?”
“No. I put in the call from The King’s Head in Hartfield. Mrs. Ellis has offered to send me home with her
son. Or failing that, a family friend, George something, will take me to London.”
I could tell he wasn’t happy about that, but he said nothing. I explained about the concussion, and he
nodded. With a final look around the room, he opened the door, and I led him back to the hall. Lydia was
there, and Roger.
Simon greeted her like an old friend, although I could tell he was silently taking note of the progression of
the bruise on her face. Roger flushed a little as Simon turned to him. Lydia made the introductions and said,
“We dined with Mr. Brandon while I was in London.”
It had been a lunch, but I said nothing.
“Indeed,” Roger Ellis replied as the two men shook hands.
“I’ll be off, then,” Simon said. “I’ll tell your mother, shall I, that everything was to your liking?”
We hadn’t opened the valises. He meant the situation. “Yes, please. And give her my love. I’ll see her at
the end of the weekend.”
He put a comradely hand on my shoulder, a warning I thought to Roger Ellis not to lay a hand on me if he
were in the mood to attack women. Then he bade us farewell and was gone out the door. As I heard the
motorcar turn in the drive and head for the track through the forest, I felt alone somehow.
“How long have you known Brandon?” Captain Ellis was asking.
“Simon? All of my life, I expect. I can’t recall a time when he wasn’t there. He was in my father’s regiment.”
“A military man, is he?” I knew what he was asking: Why wasn’t Simon in uniform? He was young enough
to fight.
“Retired,” I said simply. “He serves now at the discretion of the War Office.” Turning to Lydia, I said, “I
think we’ve done everything on Mrs. Ellis’s list. Should we go up now and change?”
“Yes, that’s a very good idea. It was nice of Mr. Brandon to bring what you needed. But I would have gladly
let you borrow something.”
Mrs. Ellis came in at that moment and said, “There you are, Roger, my dear. Would you mind running over
to the Lanyon farm and asking them to deliver more wood, if they have it? Just to be sure we don’t run short.
And that reminds me, I need another dozen eggs. I expect I ought to take the other motorcar and beg Janet
Smyth for whatever she has to spare.” She turned to me. “Bess, would you and Lydia mind coming back
down here and keeping an eye open for George? He should have been here three-quarters of an hour ago.”
“He probably stopped at The King’s Head,” Roger said under his breath, but Mrs. Ellis caught the remark.
“Be a little generous, my dear,” she admonished her son.
By the time we had returned to the hall, I could hear a motorcar coming up the drive.
To everyone’s surprise, it was Henry, grinning from ear to ear. Margaret rushed into his arms with a cry of
joy, and then clung to him, as if afraid he’d fly away if she let him go.
Henry, an artillery officer, was dark and slim, a contrast to Margaret’s fairness, but I saw a nervous tic by
his left eye. I found myself wondering if he had come by this leave medically, when a doctor took note of the
early signs of exhaustion and stress.
Soon afterward Alan’s widow arrived, accompanied by her brother, Thomas Joyner, a quiet man with a
Naval beard and little to say for himself. He had lost an arm when his cruiser was torpedoed, and was now
posted to the Admiralty. We had several friends in common, and he seemed to relax as we talked.
Finally, George Hughes arrived. From the flush on his face I couldn’t help but think that Roger Ellis was
right—he’d stopped in Hartfield for a little Dutch courage. But whatever he’d had to drink there, he was cold
sober now. As he turned to greet us, his impeccable uniform was splashed with blood, and across his
forehead was a bruised area that was also bleeding, as if he’d struck his head hard against something. The
knuckles on one hand were badly scraped. Mrs. Ellis had returned by that time, and he apologized
immediately for the delay as she broke off her greeting to stare at his face.
“But George, what on earth happened—?” she asked.
“I’m all right, although the motorcar is a little the worse for wear. That bend in the road—you know it? After
that long straightaway? I came around it and there was a dead tree toppled directly in my path.”
“A tree? George, there aren’t any trees just there.”
“I know. All I could think of was that it had fallen from a cart carrying wood. I can tell you I was damn—very
lucky. I think Roger and I ought to move it before someone else comes to grief. I tried, but I didn’t have any
rope in the motorcar. It would take that to budge it.”
“By all means! He’s just coming down. George, this is Sister Crawford, a friend of Lydia’s here for the
weekend. You’ll allow her to look at your forehead, won’t you? And what about your ribs? Did you strike the
steering wheel? Did you do any damage there? I’d hate to think—they’ve only just begun to heal.”
He touched his chest with his fist. “So far I can breathe without difficulty. But it was a very near thing, I can
tell you. No, don’t trouble, Sister,” he went on as I came forward. “A little soap and water—but Daisy could
have a look at my tunic, if she would. Before the blood sets.”
Mrs. Ellis whisked him away to the kitchens, and on the way I heard her calling to her son. Ten minutes
later, Roger and George went out to the motorcar, and I heard them drive off.
I had just gone up for a shawl to put around my shoulders when the motorcar returned. As I came into the
hall, I could hear George apologizing again, this time to Roger. I caught the last words as they opened the
door and came in quickly, shutting out the wind.
“ . . . but it was there, as certain as I am here before you.”
“Yes, all right. We’ll say nothing to Mother, shall we?” Roger was a little ahead of his friend, his face set.
He walked on, leaving George to talk to me. I could see that the wound had been cleaned quite efficiently,
but he sat down in one of the hall chairs like a man who had been shamed.
I was about to make an effort at conversation, when Henry came into the hall and said, “What’s this I hear
about a tree in the road? Good Lord, man, look at your face! I didn’t see anything when I came through, and I
couldn’t have been that far ahead of you.”
“I expect,” George said with an effort at lightness, “I mistook a ewe for a tree. There was a scattering of
fleece across the road. But no blood. I think honors go to her.”
“Yes, well, how’s the motorcar?”
They went off discussing the left wing, and I remembered the scraped knuckles on George’s hand. He
hadn’t got that from charging into a flock of sheep. It looked more like trying to deal with the tree. Whatever
Roger Ellis tried to tell him.
He smiled as he passed me, but it didn’t reach his haunted eyes.
We gathered in the hall for drinks that evening, and I sat beside Gran, who was enjoying having her family
around her, her bright eyes taking in what everyone was wearing and all that was said.
She turned to me at one point, saying, “This is a pale shadow of how we entertained in my day. My
husband knew so many people. The house was always full, and we had the staff to cope with the guests.
There are photographs somewhere. I’m sure we kept them.”
Dinner that night was rather ordinary fare, but no one seemed to mind, and there was a good wine from
the cellars.
It wasn’t until we had all gathered again in the hall that George asked the question that everyone else had
been too polite to bring up. “Whatever happened to your face, Lydia?”
I thought at first that he’d drunk too much port to remember his manners.
But then he added gently, “We can’t help but see the bruising and the black eye. I think you’ll be more
comfortable if we stop trying to pretend we don’t notice.”
She turned beet red, and everyone stared, then looked quickly away.
Roger answered before she could. “Ran into one of the cupboard doors while looking for the
wineglasses. The doctor says no harm done.”
Lydia smiled gratefully at him, and I wondered if he’d been prepared for questions, because the response
had seemed so natural and unforced.
I’d watched her without seeming to, and I rather thought her condition was improving. There was no sign
of either a headache or dizziness, and I had the feeling that she and Roger were trying to make amends for
their quarrel. She seemed more comfortable with him, and once I saw her touch his hand while laughing
over a story he’d told. It was possible that I could leave with Simon the next afternoon after all.
That buoyed my spirits.
The evening was ending on a pleasant note until there was one disruptive comment from George Hughes.
“I’d have thought the drawing room would be more comfortable on a night like this,” he said when a
sudden gust of wind and rain roared down the chimney, sending woodsmoke billowing out of the great
expanse of hearth, making us cough. “Besides, I miss the portrait. I always look forward to seeing it again.”
Gran said sharply, “George, you ought to be in your bed. As we all should. It’s growing late.”
He took out his watch, looked at the time, and put it away. “So it is.”
That was the signal for everyone to rise and murmur something about the tiring drive. I stayed in the hall
until they had all gone up, and then followed. Roger passed me coming back to see to the fire, and I said
good night.
He nodded, and went on his way without speaking.
I went once to the room over the hall to look for Lydia—George had been given the guest room where
she’d spent last night—but she wasn’t there. Smiling to myself, I slipped quietly back to my own bed.
The next day went fairly well, the sun coming out in the early morning hours and staying with us most of the
afternoon before slipping again behind dark clouds.
We went to St. Mary’s Church in Wych Gate in a convoy of motorcars at two o’clock in the afternoon. The
track meandered and turned back on itself, and then followed a line of trees.
I could see the church now, the tower tall as the tallest tree, the red brick vivid amongst the bare branches.
There was a high iron gate in the wall that surrounded the churchyard, and no sign of a Rectory. We passed
the main entrance and turned into a broad grassy space just beyond. To one side I could see a smaller gate
letting into the churchyard, and on the far side, I could hear the sound of water splashing over stone as the
motors were cut off. A path, almost lost in the tangled growth under the trees, must lead to a nearby stream,
in spate after all the rain.
As we got down and walked through the open gate, the first thing that met my eye was a grave in the
shadow of the church, bordered by white marble. On the mounded earth inside the border a white marble
