171 



 

Complete a Baseline and Forecast form for each participant. 

 



 


Baseline And Forecast 

Baseline Scores 

Reader’s Name: Date: 

 

Test Results: 

Reading Speed: WPM 

Reading Comprehension: % 

 

Statement of Intent (What I want from this course): 

End Results Forecast 

Imagine you have already completed the course and you are reviewing your 
progress. 

This is the result: 

 

I read at least words per minute. 

 

I comprehend at least % of what I read. 

 

My image of myself after completing the course: 

I ... 

Am 

 

 

Do 

 

 

Have 

 

 


Week 1 

Day 2 

 


Describe the 
Homunculus Man in 
the brain in 
preparation to 
performing the 
Center of Creation 
imagery that will be 
done with each 
reading experience 
from this day on. 
After performing 
this imagery a few 
times, it may be 
performed by simply 
stating a key phrase 
or word to cause the mind to instantly go to that state of being. An anchor or 
key phrase for establishing the creative space might be “I am still” or some 
other similar phrase or word. After the body has been conditioned by 
repeated experience with the imagery, the phrase alone will take the mind to 
the center of creation (the space between the pineal and pituitary glands in 
the brain - a corresponding space exists in other dimensions of 
consciousness). 

Along the medial ridge of the brain (from ear to ear) are two strips of 
cortical (brain) material called the central sulcus. One strip of cortical 
material represents feeling while another represents motor activity (muscular 
control). By systematically identifying and activating each part represented 
in the brain, the consciousness moves deliberately to the center of the brain 
where the pineal and pituitary glands exist. This imagery focuses on the 
space between the pineal gland (above and slightly behind the ears) and the 
pituitary gland (slightly ahead of the ears). 

This is the space where powerful structures of the brain modulate such 
functions as memory, emotion, core belief, and perceptions of survival. 
Before one experiences something in the world, s/he will imagine it in this 
space. Further, this imagining tends to carry itself out in manifestation in 
time. Directing the attention to this powerfully creative space in a systematic 
way tends to bring about manifestation. 


So, sit back, relax, and take a big deep breath. Read this out loud to yourself 
while imagining it. Or, ask someone else to read it to you as you follow 
along in your mind. Or, record your own voice reading the imagery. 

Instructions to the reader will be between < > marks. 

 

 


Center of Creation Imagery 

Bring about a feeling of inner relaxation in the whole body... concentrate on 
the body and become aware of the importance of complete stillness. 
<pause>. Develop your awareness of the body from the top of the head to 
the tips of the toes and say in your mind “My mind is still, still, still and my 
body is relaxed, relaxed, relaxed”. <pause>. Complete stillness and 
complete awareness of the whole body... say again in your mind “My mind 
is still, still, still and my body is relaxed, relaxed, relaxed.” <pause>. 
Continue your awareness of the whole body... the whole body... the whole 
body. <long pause>. 

State your intent to yourself at this point. The intent will be very simple... 
discover one naturally. Develop an intent to say at this time. <pause>. Make 
it a short, positive statement in simple language... stated three times with 
awareness, feeling and emphasis. <long pause>. 

Now we begin rotation of consciousness, rotation of awareness by taking a 
trip through the different parts of the body. Repeat the part in your mind and 
simultaneously become aware of that part of the body. Keep yourself alert 
yet avoid concentrating too intensely. Become aware of the right hand. 
<pause>. 

Right thumb, index finger, middle finger, ring finger, little finger, palm of 
the right hand, back of the hand, the right wrist, the lower arm, the elbow, 
the upper arm, the shoulder, the armpit, become aware of the right waist, the 
right hip, the right thigh, the kneecap, the calf, the ankle, the heel, the sole of 
the right foot, become aware of the top of the foot, the big toe, second toe, 
third toe, fourth toe, fifth toe... 

Become aware of the left hand thumb, index finger, middle finger, ring 
finger, little finger, palm of the left hand, back of the hand, the wrist, the 
lower arm, the left elbow, the upper arm, the shoulder, the armpit, become 
aware of the left waist, the left hip, the left thigh, the kneecap, the calf, the 
ankle, the heel, the sole of the left foot, become aware of the top of the foot, 
the big toe, second toe, third toe, fourth toe, fifth toe... 

Now to the back. Become aware of the right shoulder blade, the left shoulder 
blade... the right buttock, the left buttock... the spine... the whole back 
together... 

Now go to the top of the head. The top of the head; the forehead, both sides 
of the head, the right eyebrow, the left eyebrow, the space between the 
eyebrows, the right eyelid, the left eyelid, the right eye, the left eye, the right 


ear, the left ear, the right cheek, the left cheek, the chin, the throat, the right 
side of the chest, the left side of the chest, the middle of the chest, the navel, 
the abdomen... 

The whole of the right leg... the whole of the left leg... both legs together... 
<pause>. The whole of the right arm... the whole of the left arm... both arms 
together... <pause>. The whole of the back, buttocks, spine, shoulder 
blades... the whole of the front, abdomen, chest... the whole of the back and 
front together... the whole of the head... the whole body together... the whole 
body together... the whole body together. <pause>. 

Now that your body is completely relaxed and you are aware of every part, 
imagine that you are standing in the very center of your own brain. You are 
only a quarter of an inch tall and you can stand easily within the small cavity 
that is formed by your pineal gland above and your pituitary gland below. It 
is safe and warm and comfortable. You notice a wonderful and strange 
thing: this place is full of light, memories, visions of understanding, 
intuitions, flashes of inspiration, feelings of connectedness and relationship 
with all life. Notice how these images pass by you like beautifully colored 
birds, flowing pictures, and primary shapes. Allow the understandings to 
come to you naturally and easily. Notice how your body feels with each 
image you encounter. Just make note of it and let it pass by. 

In this wonderful space there is quiet, serenity, peace. It is also a magical 
space. Above is the pineal, the key to your spiritual connection with higher 
consciousness. Below you is the pituitary, the key to the physical dimension 
of self. In this space between the two is the magic of pure creativity. A 
number of different things will be named now. Develop a vision of them on 
all levels... feeling, awareness, emotion, imagination, as best you can... 
<pause>. Just allow any image to come to you. <pause>. 

Burning candle... burning candle... burning candle... endless desert... endless 
desert... endless desert... Egyptian pyramid... Egyptian pyramid... Egyptian 
pyramid... torrential rain... torrential rain... torrential rain... snow capped 
mountains... snow capped mountains... snow capped mountains... temple at 
sunrise... temple at sunrise... temple at sunrise... solitary coffin beside a 
grave... solitary coffin beside a grave... solitary coffin beside a grave... birds 
flying across a sunset... birds flying across a sunset... birds flying across a 
sunset... red clouds drifting... red clouds drifting... red clouds drifting... a 
cross above a church... a cross above a church... a cross above a church... 
stars at night... stars at night... stars at night... full moon... full moon... full 
moon... smiling Buddha... smiling Buddha... smiling Buddha... wind from 


the sea... wind from the sea... wind from the sea... waves breaking on a 
deserted beach... waves breaking on a deserted beach... waves breaking on a 
deserted beach... the restless sea... eternal restless sea... eternal restless sea... 
<long pause>. 

Now flash on the end result of your Light-Speed Reading experience. Flash 
on what you will be like when you have completed this course in reading. 
Flash on reading whole books at once. Flash on it... <pause>. 

Now is the time to repeat your intent... repeat the same intent that you made 
earlier, repeat the intent three times with full awareness and feeling. 
<pause>. 

Any thought or intention imagined in this magical space is sure to come into 
physical manifestation so imagine your life exactly as you desire it to be. 
State your intention out loud to yourself. Allow this image to become one 
unlimited thought. Now take the thought out of your head and place it in 
your cupped physical hands in front of you. With your unlimited thought 
held in front of you in your two hands, quickly blow into your hands and 
release your intent into the universe as though you were casting seeds out 
into the air. This begins the physical process of creation. 

Return now to your quiet, still, space again and allow the satisfaction of pure 
creation to sweep over you like clear sparkling water. Imagine that light is 
flowing through you like the water: coming into your head from the pineal 
and flowing out your feet to the pituitary. Know that your creation is perfect. 
Know that it is deserving and acknowledged by universal mind, infinite 
power, God. Let this knowing fill your entire being... your entire being... 
your entire being... <pause>. 

It is time now to return to the physical dimension of time and space from 
which we came. Allow your mind to begin to notice the physical space that 
you occupy. Feel that which touches your own body in present time. Sense 
that you have returned to the room and open your eyes here and now. 

Adapted with great gratitude and honor from Yoga Nidra, by Swami 
Satyananda Saraswati of the Bihar School of Yoga, Munger, India 

 

 


Week 1 

Day 3 

Today participants will learn how to exercise their eyes in preparation for 
reading rapidly. Because reading is a visual activity, the eyes must be kept 
free of stress and strain. The following presents several simple eye exercises 
designed specifically for Light-Speed Reading. The same exercises may be 
used for simple stress and eyestrain relief. Practice each of these exercises 
daily or whenever you read. Spend today’s time just learning how to move 
the eyes before and during reading. We’ll get to the actual reading later. 

Begin with the same imagery you experienced yesterday (Center of 
Creation). Make sure everyone is well grounded afterward. Holding hands, 
hugging, or other strong body contact may accomplish grounding. Placing 
the right hand on the top of the head may help. 

 

Eye Exercises 

Preparing to read: 

.. Look to your left knee then to your right knee. Look back and forth 
until your eyes feel like they want to blink a lot. 
.. Roll your eyes in large circles as far as you can stretch them to the 
periphery. 
.. Continue rolling your eyes first clockwise then counterclockwise 
several times. 
.. Stop and shut your eyes very tightly - then open - close tightly - 
then open -- continue for 5 blinks. 
.. Hum a bar or so of music (“Happy Birthday”). 
.. Count from 1 to 10 forward, then backward from 10 to 1. 
.. Hum a bar or so of music (“Happy Birthday”). 
.. Take a deep breath and exhale all at once. 
.. Continue the movement-blink-hum-count-hum-breath exercise 
about 3 times (this will take about 1 minute). 
.. Breathe in deeply through your nose - hold for a count of 3 
(imagine you could gather all the stress in your body into the 
breath) - then release it all at once out the mouth (mouth wide 



open) - a big sigh! Let your shoulders drop and relax with the 
breath (notice them drop). 


 

You may replace the above with the RET Emotional First Aid process. 

 

Sharpening Intuitive Sensitivity: 

.. Close your eyes 
.. Repeat the above exercise with your eyes closed 
.. Remember to breath 
.. Be aware of what you “see” within - it’s all okay 


 

Relieving Eye Strain 

.. Look at a distant object (beyond 15 feet) 
.. Look at a near object (closer than 10 inches) 
.. Look back and forth between them - focusing near then far 
.. Repeat 5 - 10 times 
.. Look close to the left then far to the right 
.. Look close to the right then far to the left 
.. Repeat 5 - 10 times 
.. Place your thumb up in front of you at arm’s length (like artist’s 
do) 
.. Move your thumb in a variety of directions while following with 
your eyes focused on the thumbnail (keep your head still) - really 
stretch yourself sometimes 
.. Continue for 20 seconds 
.. Stop, breath deeply in the nose, out the mouth (like a sigh) 
.. Blink your eyes very hard 5 times then breath again - relax your 
body like a rag doll 


 

 

 


Week 1 

Day 4 

Required Equipment - an eye patch for each participant. A properly fitted 
eye patch will stand away from the eye enough to allow the eye to be open 
under the patch, yet block all or nearly all light. 

Today, we will be learning about eye patching. Eye patching is a stress 
relief, awareness, balancing therapy that we will be adapting to the reading 
experience. Patches must be of a type that allows the eye to be open beneath 
the patch. This is important because the brain must think the eye is open in 
order to bring about the desired effect. When the eye is closed, the brain 
shuts the receptors down and “looks” within. The desired effect of patching 
is to shut down the input to the brain while the brain is actively seeking 
“outward.” 

Approximately 85 - 90 % of the sensory input to each brain hemisphere 
comes from the visual. If the visual input is shut down (as it is when the 
room is completely darkened), the brain goes into hypersensitivity (seeking 
to see like you would if you were in a dark cave or in the forest at night). 
This increased brain sensitivity opens the pupil of the covered eye (to allow 
more light), causes the sensory elements of the eye to become hypersensitive 
(again, attempting to see into the darkness), and causes the governing brain 
hemisphere to relax (as a result of the lack of visual stimulus). 

What most people will experience with eye patching is an increase in visual 
acuity, a sense of “lightness” in the room, and an overall lessening of stress 
and strain on the eyes. When reading, the processes of visual acuity, 
contrast, and awareness become quite important. The reader must be able to 
see clearly and easily the words and concepts developed by the author. So, 
here’s the theory behind the patching: 

With one eye patched, one brain hemisphere becomes hypersensitive 
(intensifying) while the other seeks to compensate, becoming hypo-sensitive 
(lessening). This imbalance creates a state wherein the reader has two 
completely different concepts of the text being read. One concept is that 
being directly fed from the uncovered eye to the brain. The other concept is 
that being shared from the uncovered eye - through it’s governing brain 
hemisphere - to the other brain hemisphere. This condition strengthens the 
communication bridge between brain hemispheres (the corpus callosum) and 
creates a paradigm shift (a change of thought patterning) in the reader. 


Reading with an eye patch will cause the brain hemispheres (and their 
corresponding energy fields) to communicate with each other - first on a 
survival level - then on a respect level - then on a love level. When your two 
brain hemispheres arrive at a mutual love and respect, light-speed reading is 
a reality. To speed up the process of learning to read at light-speed, consider 
patching the eyes often. 

Today, we will be patching according to the following: 

Have fun with this!! 

 

Caution: Never wear an eye patch while driving, cutting, operating 
equipment, or doing anything that requires depth perception. 

 

Eye Patching 

What patching might be doing 

 

• Closing down the visual input to almost half your brain 
• Causing a relaxation to occur to a large part of your brain 
• The un-patched brain half will tend to take command 
• Causing the brain to go into its mono-brain early childhood 
developmental state (rapid learning mode) 
• Shutting down mind chatter on one side, spatial conceptualizing on 
the other 
• Allowing the brains to communicate more intensely 


 

 

How to patch 

 

1. Place the eye patch over one eye (either eye will do). Adjust it to 
fit comfortably. 
2. Experience the patch for several minutes until you feel irritated or 
very sedated (you may feel that you just don’t want that thing on 
you anymore) 
3. Place the patch over the other eye for several minutes (until again 
you feel you want to change) 
4. Remember: it’s simple 


 

 Patching while reading 


 

1. Place the patch over one eye and read normally (verbally) for 
several minutes 
2. Place the patch over the other eye and read normally (verbally) for 
several minutes 
3. Notice any differences in the way you feel and think in one mode 
or the other 
4. Particularly notice if patching one eye causes you to daydream or 
look beyond the words 
5. Practice reading with the patch over this eye (it’s probably the eye 
that refers to the brain that was unused when you learned how to 
read before - your spatial brain) 


 

 Patching while reading upside-down 

 

1. Place the eye patch on the eye that tends to make you feel more 
spatial and day-dreamy 
2. Place the reading material upside-down in front of you 
3. Read over the material as fast as you can looking at the page 
upside-down (you’ll have to read backward - right-to-left, too) - 
read for about 5 - 10 minutes 
4. Notice how much you comprehend in your “knowingness” mode 
5. Turn the page right-side-up and reread as fast as you can 
6. Reread the same material upside-down with the patch removed 
7. Reread the same material right-side-up with the patch removed 
8. Notice how you feel each time 
9. Notice where you were correct (disregard any incorrect perceptions 
- these were only other perceptions or ways of understanding the 
same material) 
10. Reading the material upside-down with and without the patch 
teaches your brain what the words “look like” - this will be very 
valuable when you are “seeing” whole pages at a time 


 

 

 

 

 

 


Week II 

Integrating The Basic Process 

 

 Day 1 

2 hour session today 

Introduce the Public Library (source of reading material) 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, if you are not the one driving). 

Once at the library, discover and peruse the children’s section. Find some 
children’s books that interest each participant (even if the books are very 
simple or seem to be far below the abilities of the participant - release all 
judgment). Read by perusal only - scan each book for interest. Just for fun! 

Focus attention on the 6th grade reading level area. Find some books that 
have mostly pictures and seem interesting to the participants. Resist the 
temptation to “peek” inside the books until it is time to do so. 

At a table or chair (where the participants can sit comfortably) each 
participant opens a book, patches one eye, and “reads” the book upside-
down. Just have fun patching and looking at books upside-down. Let go of 
any frustration in “reading” the book by allowing all ideas to be okay. Trust 
intuition and ASK NO QUESTIONS about what was read. Just allow it. 
Have fun with it. Play! Play! Play! 

Bring two or three books home with you (depending upon how far you have 
to travel to the library). Tomorrow you will be learning how to turn the 
pages of these books. DO NOT READ THEM... 

 

 

 


 

Week II 

Day 2 

 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. 

Today, we learn how to turn pages!! When you are reading as fast as you 
can turn the pages, it becomes important how fast you can turn those pages. 
Using the books you brought back with you from the library, follow the 
instructions on the next page - “Turning Pages.” 

 

Turning Pages 

 Method 1: 

 

1. Place the book in your non-dominant hand 
2. Place the index finger in the middle between the pages to hold 
them open 
3. Place dominant hand at the top of the page to be turned 
4. Turn page by “flipping” the page with the fingers of the dominant 
hand while removing the index finger of the non-dominant hand 
5. Hold the page open with the index finger of the non-dominant 
hand 
6. Continue flipping and holding for each page turned 
7. Practice until the process becomes smooth and rapid 


 

 

Method 2: 

 

1. Place book on a hard flat surface (like a table) 
2. Hold the page open with the right hand 
3. Turn pages with the left hand by flipping the pages quickly with 
the middle finger 
4. Hold the page down until the right hand can hold both pages open 
5. Continue holding - flipping - holding until you get a rhythm 
developed 
6. Practice until the process becomes smooth and rapid 



 

 

Method 3: 

 

1. Hold the book with your left hand at the top binding or the bottom 
binding 
2. Hold the page open with either the thumb of the left hand at the 
bottom center binding (in the margin) or at the top center binding 
(in the margin) with your left index or middle finger 
3. As you scan the left page, prepare to turn the next page by placing 
the middle finger of your right hand on the center margin of the 
right page (or the bottom outside corner) 
4. As you nearly complete the scan of the right page, gently, and 
quickly, push your right hand middle finger to the left, causing the 
page to curl and flip to the left 
5. Hold the page open with the thumb of your left hand on the bottom 
center margin (at the binding), or with your index or middle finger 
of your left hand at the top center margin (at the binding) 


 

 


Week II 

Day 3 

 

Today, we will be doing our first real “reading” exercises. Before we do any 
reading, however, we will do the Center of Creation imagery - it is probably 
quite easy to do by now. 

Follow the directions in the following section with a book from the library. 
First, read the entire procedure out loud to the participants. Be sure you all 
understand the process before anyone begins. Do all the preparatory 
exercises today. Tomorrow we will “read.” 

Pay particular attention to the eye exercises and the breathing techniques. 
Since reading is a visual process it is important to prepare your “tools” 
before using them. Performing good preventative maintenance on your eyes 
and stress levels is imperative in the Light-Speed Reading program. 
Performing RET on any stressful thoughts or beliefs about reading is 
imperative. 

It is important that you follow the directions in the following section exactly. 
Modify them only after you have followed them to the letter for at least four 
weeks. This is important because the left, controlling, serial-oriented brain 
hemisphere will want to return you to the old one-word-at-a-time, sounded-
out reading process learned in school. It is our intent to extend ourselves 
beyond this limitation. 

Hold fast to the program as it is, releasing any desire to “correct” or 
“modify” it until you follow it exactly for several weeks. Trust yourself, 
even when it feels like you are making no progress. Especially stay with it 
when you feel like you are digressing. The feeling of digression is a sure 
sign that the process is working VERY well and that a major breakthrough is 
imminent. Reading is a skill to be learned. Like a new habit, the process of 
reading will take some time to replace old habits. RET will speed this process 
along greatly. 

Trust! Trust! Trust! 


 

How to Read 

Novels and Magazine Articles 

 Preparation 

 

1. While seated look to your left knee then to your right knee. Look 
back and forth until your eyes feel like they want to blink a lot. 
2. Roll your eyes in large circles as far as you can stretch them to the 
periphery. 
3. Continue rolling your eyes first clockwise then counterclockwise 
several times. 
4. Stop and shut your eyes very tightly - then open - close tightly - 
then open -- continue for 5 blinks. 
5. Hum a bar or so of music. 
6. Count from 1 to 10 forward, then backward from 10 to 1. 
7. Hum a bar or so of music. 
8. Take a deep breath and exhale all at once. 
9. Continue the movement-blink-hum-count-hum-breath exercise 5 
times (this will take about 1 minute). 
10. Breathe in deeply through your nose - hold for a count of 3 
(imagine you could gather all the stress in your body into the 
breath) - then release it all at once out the mouth (mouth wide 
open) - a big sigh! Let your shoulders drop and relax with the 
breath (notice them drop). 
11. Repeat the breath 3 times. 
12. Pick up the reading material. 
13. Bend it, open it, adjust it to make the pages move easily and 
quickly (new books will need to be opened in several places and 
folded back to loosen the binding). 
14. Turn the book upside-down and “flip” the pages through - like 
“fanning” them. 


You may replace the above with the RET Emotional First Aid process. 

 

Begin the Reading Process 

 

1. Turn to the book’s inside jacket cover to find the synopsis (if there 
is one) - scan it quickly to get the general idea of the book. 



2. Scan the introduction to further your knowledge of the concept of 
the book. 
3. Scan the first 2 - 3 pages of the book to get the starting idea. 
4. Scan the last 2 - 3 pages to get a feel for where the book ends. 
5. Open the book to the middle and scan 2-3 pages to discover the 
general direction of the book. 
6. Intuit as much of the story as you can - make a possible movie in 
your mind. 


 

 

Read the Material 

 

1. Return to the beginning and fill in the details of what you know 
already - visually read as fast as you can go. 
2. Always read faster than your voice can say the words - seek out the 
concepts and ideas - go for the mind pictures - read with your eyes 
and mind rather than your voice. 
3. Always read forward - trust that you are getting the ideas and 
understandings as you continue. 


 

 

After Reading 

 

1. Repeat the eye movement - breathing exercise. 
2. Let your body relax and recall the “movie” you’ve just created in 
your mind as you read the material. 
3. Ask yourself several open-ended questions: 


 

“What did I like about this material?” 

“How did I grow from this material?” 

“What do I know now from this material?” 

“How is this material like my life? - How is it different?” 

“Would I like to read more of this author’s material? - why?” 

 

 

 


Tips and Pointers 

 

1. Soft focus on the page - take in a snapshot of whole pages at once. 
2. Trust that you have a picture in your mind of the material. 
3. Relax and enjoy the journey - you do know the material. 
4. Find a natural rhythm that you will continue to the end (ALWAYS 
move forward - even when you don’t think you “got” the material). 
5. At the middle point (where you read before) check to see if your 
original ideas need modification - DO NOT STOP - always 
continue forward to the end. 
6. Remain flexible - changing your concepts and pictures of the 
material as you continue. Avoid locking on to an idea and 
discarding additional evidence. 
7. It is better to read the whole thing than to read part now and part 
later - at light speed the material will take you very little time - so 
read the whole thing or choose another time to read. 
8. At first, choose 6th grade level material (newspapers are written at 
this level) to develop your skills. Progress to more difficult 
material when you are sure of your skills. 
9. Remember that light-speed reading is a skill and requires practice. 
10. Patch your eyes often to develop your brain’s light-speed reading 
capability. 
11. If any anxiety develops during the process of light-speed reading, 
seek out a qualified Rapid Eye Technician to assist you in 
discharging and relieving the anxiety. Anxiety will take you 
immediately out of light-speed mode. 
12. Daydreaming (seeing pictures and experiences while awake) is 
desirable in the light-speed reading process. This point is very 
valuable to parents teaching this process to their children: when the 
reader is in absolute synchronization with the writer of the 
material, a dream will occur in which the reader will “experience” 
the material. This is extremely valuable to the reader - it means 
that they “got” the material on a cellular level (the material is 
“embodied” in the reader). Rejoice! 


 

 

 

 


Week II 

Day 4 

 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, for those not driving). 

Today’s focus is on reading! Introduce the “How to Read“ page as a whole 
process. Take several books from the library (6th grade reading level), 
present them for reading exercises, and turn the participants loose to enjoy 
and practice. Keep the process simple - practice! practice! practice! 

Remember: 

Practice! Practice! Practice! 

 

 


Week III 

Day 1 

2-hour session today 

Begin this session again with the Center of Creation imagery, patching, and 
breathing exercises. Repeat the eye exercises before reading any book 
(according to the “How to Read instructions). 

Go to the public library children’s section (6th grade reading level area) 
again today. Take 30 minutes and speed-read as many books as each person 
can. Follow the basic reading principles. Read only novels that interests the 
reader. Trust your inner sense about each book. It is imperative that each 
person read according to the “How to Read” instructions ONLY. Resist the 
desire to return to your old way of reading. Even if the book seems very 
interesting and you want to really get into it, resist the desire to read it 
slowly. You must flash through the book. You are now reading the way you 
will always read from now on. You must continue to read in this new 
dynamic way. You are creating a new habit, a new way of thinking, a new 
you. Since you had the old habit for so long, it may tug at you often in the 
process of change. Just acknowledge the feeling, do your eye exercises, 
breath deeply and sigh it away - then continue to read in your new way. 

While you are reading, trust your ideas and “guess” the story as you go. DO 
NOT TEST either speed or comprehension. If a participant desires to do so, 
you may estimate speed. Resist the desire to please the brain’s left 
hemisphere (the one that must have objectivity). In order to digest the whole 
story at once, you must release the left hemisphere’s control. Keep in mind 
that the right hemisphere is fast (whole ideas at once) while the left 
hemisphere wants to analyze (takes a long time). The left side wants proof 
while the right side wants relationship (wholeness). When the left side 
releases control (no testing, eye patching, and breathing), the right side will 
take over. Reading is a right brain hemisphere function. By addressing the 
right hemisphere, you bypass the analytical, linear, slow (because everything 
must be proven) left hemisphere and get a whole picture of the story. In this 
case “guessing” the story is justified and encouraged. Regardless of the 
“guess”, it is right!! 

The reading period may be extended to 1 hour if the readers desire to 
continue; however, through much practice and experimentation, 30 minutes 
has proven to be the outer limits of most young readers’ attention span. In 30 
minutes, many youth (12 - 18) can read about 3 - 4 books. 


 

Week III 

Day 2 

Repeat the Center of Creation imagery and eye exercises. Begin your day by 
repeating the eye and breath exercises in the “How to Read“ instructions. This 
will prepare you for the intensity of today’s learning. 

Return to the public library’s children’s section. Find several books that 
seem interesting to the readers. This time, open the books and read them 
according to the “How to Read” instructions holding the books upside-down. 
Read as many books as you can in 30 minutes. Read some with an eye 
patched and some with the eye un-patched. 

Experience total loss of control while reading. As frustration comes up, 
repeat the eye exercises and breath deeply (deep sighs). You can also do EFT 
about the frustration. 

Continue to exercise your right hemisphere reading skills until the time has 
elapsed. Allow any “guess” at the story to be correct. Resist going back over 
the same material slowly to “check” your guess. 

In order to bring out the whole-brain experience of reading you must trust 
the right hemisphere. Trust it implicitly. For now, avoid “testing” your 
intuitions in any way. Just let the stories be correct and continue believing in 
your intuitive side. 

Believe! Believe! Believe! 

You Are What You Think You Are 

If you think you are beaten, you are. 

If you think you dare not, you don’t. 

If you like to win but think you can’t, 

It’s almost certain that you won’t. 

Life’s little battle don’t always go 

To the stronger woman or man, 

But sooner or later, those who win 

Are those who think they can. 

 

- Anonymous 


 

 

Week III 

Day 3 

 

Repeat the previous day’s exercises (including the Center of Creation and 
eye exercises). 

Work on getting past the feeling of frustration while reading visually. Be 
gentle with yourself. Remember that this is a new process to your psyche. 
Give it a little empathy and continue to do your eye exercises and breathing. 
Just have some fun with this. Continue this day’s practice until you 
overcome the frustration. Take as many days to practice as the participants 
need. 

Do not continue the program until each participant has overcome 
his/her frustrations and is having fun. 

 

Remember: Trust Yourself 

 

 


Week III 

Day 4 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, for those not driving). 

Today, you will learn how to take notes (see next page for instructions). The 
participants will choose longer books in the adult fiction novel section of the 
public library. Using the “How to Read“ instructions, flash read a whole book 
as fast as you can turn the pages (use the “Turning Pages“ instructions if 
necessary). Take a picture of each page and make a “guess” about the story 
as you complete the book. Write notes of the book afterward. The notes 
gives your left hemisphere some reality about what was taken in. Trust your 
intuition about the story. Since reading is a perceptual journey and 
everyone’s perceptual journey is different, your synopsis of the book is 
every bit as valid as anyone else’s perception of the book. 

 Remember: 

Reading is fun! 

 

Taking Notes 

Taking notes is a wonderful and easy way to recall what you have read and 
improve your comprehension. There are many ways to take notes. For A 
Course in Light-Speed Reading, I recommend the linking memories method. 
In this method, one writes all things they remember concretely about what 
they read, connects them and links additional vague ideas. It is done in a free 
hand, free-association manner: 

 

The Wizard of Oz 

Remember to take only enough notes that you can reconstruct the story from 
your notes. Details are unnecessary as they can be drawn from your diagram. 
You may make your notes simple or more complex as you find it useful for 
you to recall what you have read. Keep in mind that you write concrete 
recall first, followed by more vague memories jarred into recall by your 
diagram. 

Recalling dreams in this manner will improve dream recall and reading 
comprehension. The comparison between dreams and reading is remarkable. 


Learning to recall dreams will dramatically improve reading recall and 
overall reading comprehension. As a rather exciting side benefit to improved 
reading comprehension, effective dream recall will likely improve your 
ability to induce lucid dreaming. 

For more information on lucid dreaming induction (which will dramatically 
improve reading comprehension, too), refer to books by Stephen LaBerge, 
Ph.D. of Stanford University. Dr. LaBerge’s book, “Exploring the World of 
Lucid Dreaming” (Ballantine Books) offers many exercises and methods for 
inducing lucid dreaming, all of which improve reading comprehension and 
recall. 

 


 

 


Week IV 

Day 1 

 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, for those not driving). 

Return to library’s children’s section. Choose novels from the 6th grade 
reading level. Light-Speed Read books for 30 minutes patched, unpatched, 
upside-down, right side-up and as fast as the pages can be turned. Again, 
“guess” the stories. Take notes on each. Remember to keep notes simple. 
Just enjoy the stories. 

Have Fun! 

The mind is so powerful that it can create an experience 
to support any belief. Then we believe the experience 
proves the belief, not knowing that the belief created the 
experience. 

Krishnamurti 

 

 

 


Week IV 

Day 2 

 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, for those not driving). 

Return to the library and repeat the same exercises you did yesterday. 
Today, however, begin to “tell the story” as you read. In other words, speak 
the story verbally while “seeing” the words visually. You must “guess” the 
story and tell it out loud while flashing through the book. If the story sounds 
a bit disjointed or vague, or even wild, it’s completely okay. 

Remember, the reader’s perception is always valid and correct. The exercise 
is intended to separate the verbal output from the visual input. A person can 
read and speak simultaneously. After practicing this technique for a while, 
one can actually carry on a conversation with someone and read 
simultaneously. 

 

Enjoy the stories. 

 

 


Week IV 

Day 3 

Begin today’s reading session with the Center of Creation imagery, followed 
by the eye exercises for review. Patch each eye for a few minutes before 
leaving for the library (patching while traveling to the library can be very 
beneficial, too, for those not driving). 

Return to the library. Choose novels from the adult fiction area. Repeat the 
previous day’s exercises. Remember to take notes. 

Some questions to ask yourself as you read (answer the questions aloud): 

“What is the plot of this story?” 

“What is happening to the characters?” 

“Who is doing what to whom?” 

“What in this story is exciting?” 

“What in this story is fun?” 

“What am I learning from this story?” 

Continue practicing the program up to this point until each participant 
has overcome his/her frustrations and is having fun. 

Check out several books from the 6th grade reading level area. Take them 
home - you will use them tomorrow. Make sure they are books that appeal to 
the readers. 

 

 


Week IV 

Day 4 

Note: Repeat previous week’s subjects until you are ready for this day. Only 
proceed to this day’s exercises when you are sure you are ready. 

Today is results day! It’s going to be fun and you will be so excited with 
your new skills. Begin the day’s session with the imagery and eye exercises. 
Breath several deep slow sighs. 

Repeat the testing procedure you did on day 1 of week 1 with books you 
brought home yesterday. 

 

Testing 

An adequate reading test may be performed in about 10 - 15 minutes. 

Setup: 

1. Person being tested has a 6th grade reading level novel of sufficient length 
to be tested for 10 minutes (at light-speed, this may need to be at least 300 
pages) 

2. There is adequate lighting and ventilation so the person is comfortable 

3. The tester has a stopwatch or second hand on a watch 

Test procedure: 

1. At the “go” signal, the reader starts and the timer starts the clock 

2. Continue reading for 10 minutes or more 

3. When time is up, timer states, “stop reading” 

4. Mark the final page and the line where reading stopped (if the line stopped 
on is half or more of a page, the whole page may be counted as read - less 
than half don’t count) 

5. Complete the exercise on the following page to determine reading speed: 


 

Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) 

 



 

Testing Comprehension: 

To test comprehension, open the books to a place the person has read and 
invent questions that illustrate their comprehension of the material. Keep it 
simple: if you ask 10 questions and they answer 8 of them correctly, they 
have 80% comprehension. 


End Results 

 

Reader’s Name: Date: 

 

Scores 

Test Results: 

Reading Speed: WPM 

Reading Comprehension: % 

 

Statement of Result (What I got from this course): 

 

Now I ... 

Am 

 

 

 

 

Do 

 

 

 

 

Have 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Reading Technical Material 

(Including text books) 

 

1. Explore the index and table of contents 
2. Know your intent (browsing, searching for information, studying, etc.) 
3. If you are studying, searching, or researching 


 

• Find your objective in the index or table of contents 
• Quickly go to the page(s) referred to 
• Scan the material for what you want, seeking the idea or 
concept 
• Notice the headings of sections (often in bold or large print) 
• Most of the time the first sentence in any paragraph is the 
main point of that paragraph 
• Take notes accordingly 


 

 

4. If you are browsing 

 

• Scan the table of contents first, then the layout of the book 
• Go to the section of interest 
• Read the first sentence of each paragraph to get the ideas 


 

5. When you must know the information 

 

• Scan the table of contents first, then the layout of the book 
• Scan the major headings first to discover parts of the text 
you already know 
• In the areas you do not know scan the first sentence of each 
paragraph to get the ideas 
• Take notes as appropriate 


 

6. Reading Technical Journals 

.. Find the article that interests you 


.. Scan the first sentence of each paragraph 



 .. Get a feel for the article - make some notes from this initial scan 
.. Light-speed read the article noticing what you do not already know 


 


Teaching Children to Read 

(age 1 to 8) 

Read to your child as often as you can. 

 

1. Read out loud to your baby in the womb before birth. Read what 
you like the best. Read at night before bed when you are relaxed 
and feel comfortable. Children love to “do” what mother does 
when she is enjoying herself. Any reading material is okay - 
whatever you enjoy the best. The key here is enjoyment. Anything 
you read that brings about an emotional response will emotionally 
affect the baby - this is good! Any emotions the mother 
experiences while reading (and NOT backed up with pain, like 
sneezing, bumping into objects, etc. - babies are very easily 
traumatized) tend to assist babies in assimilating emotions. 
2. Light-speed read often to activate your intuition for the unborn 
baby. The connection between mother and baby is very intimate. 
The possibility that the baby could learn what mother learns while 
in the womb is worth pursuing. 


 

 

Teaching very young children to read. 

 

1. Take a trip to the library or other place where young children’s 
books are kept. Introduce young children to the look and feel of 
books. Very young children will probably want to “eat” the books 
first. However, most young children’s books are covered with 
plastic or another type of protective cover. Very young children 
tend to focus on their sense of smell, taste, and touch first. 
Allowing them to have a favorable sensory experience with books 
may give them a “first” sense of pleasure with books that promotes 
later favorable encounters. 
2. Select books with LOTS of pictures (young children’s books). 
Point out the pictures so the children see them clearly and can 
make visual associations. Make the pictures interesting to you as 
well. What you enjoy, the child will enjoy. That’s one of the ways 
they build their “library” of pleasurable things. 
3. Assist the child in using their eyes to look around the room and the 
pages. Point out items of interest, things that appeal to you. Add 



plenty of other sensory input like touch and smell. Move the child 
close to the item you point out so the baby can touch it and 
possibly smell it, too. This can become a rather enjoyable and fun 
game - pointing out, then touching. Add to this an auditory 
identification - a name - and the child comes to understand what 
things are when they see them in a picture in a book. Later, you 
will use a similar process to assist the child in identifying words 
and associating those words to the items of which they already 
have sensory memory. 
4. Spend only a half hour to one hour (depending on the attention 
span of the child). Honoring the child’s attention and interest span 
encourages children to experience the reading process as a 
pleasurable and enjoyable one. 


 

 

Acclimatize the child to the library environment. 

 

1. Select children’s books with lots of pictures. Young children love 
pictures and pictures encourage children’s imagination. Intuitive 
reading is based on imagination. Take young children to the library 
often to offer them the opportunity to smell, touch, and “taste” the 
library environment. Make this a pleasurable experience so they 
can associate pleasure with reading. 
2. Let the child “read” each book by describing the story from the 
pictures. Find books in the children’s section that offer large and 
colorful pictures. Encourage the child to “read” the story from the 
pictures. Make their interpretations correct by listening to them and 
offering them your undivided attention. 
3. DO NOT read the stories to the child - let them be correct with 
their perceptions. We all like to be right and part of the Light-
Speed Reading program is learning to trust intuitive processes. 
Allowing children to be right in their own perceptions encourages 
them in trusting their own intuition. 
4. Lavish praise for their fine work. Be mindful to praise them in a 
way they prefer. Watch them to see that they accept the praise you 
offer them. For some children the words, “Very good!” come out 
sounding like, “Well, it’s about time you got it!!” For most 
children, your attention is praise enough for them to continue and 



grow. Make sure your language matches your heart when speaking 
to children - they know when your heart is not in your speech. 
5. Take home two or three books for tomorrow. Children tend to 
make special things that go home with them. Books they choose 
and take home with them tend to be treated as special. When books 
are taken home, make them special by naming them such: “Let’s 
look at your special library book.” Even very young children 
looking at pictures and verbalizing as best they can will appreciate 
special books brought home from the wonderful “book place”. 
6. Check with your local public library for special programs and story 
times for children. These special times can be very beneficial in 
acclimatizing children to the wonders of their own public libraries. 
Many of the early childhood programs offered by the public library 
are intended to facilitate early reading skills. Many of these work 
well with later integration of Light-Speed Reading skills. 
7. Make up stories based on the pictures found in children’s books. 
Rather than reading the words on the pages, make up your own 
stories to match the pictures. With very young children the stories 
will be very short and easy to make up. The whole idea is to allow 
for perceptual differences in stories. It also encourages your own 
intuitive nature. 


 

 

 

At home with two or three books (lots of pictures, few words) 

 

1. Allow the child to “read” the story from the pictures. Like at the 
library, make special time to read (like bedtime stories before bed 
time). Let them read a book with pictures as described earlier, then 
read them a story from a good bedtime story book while they just 
listen. For very young children this may take some patience on the 
part of the parent(s). 
2. Lavish praise for their fine work. Make sure that praise is honest 
and matches your heart. Make reading a successful practice for 
them by seeking to make them right in their perceptions of what 
they read. For older children (grade school age) who must read and 
understand in the same manner as their teachers or administrators, 
allow them a space at home where they can be right in the way 



they want to perceive what they read. Even if it seems very far 
fetched, make them right by praising them for their work. 
3. Return to the beginning of each book and show the child how the 
words relate to the pictures (only as long as the child’s attention 
span allows). For pre-school age young children, gently associate 
words on the page with pictures they see. By gently, I mean 
associate one or two words at a time focusing on the objects and 
verbs. For example, on a page with a teddy bear and a tree, the 
words “bear” and “tree” might appear on the page with the picture 
so you can point them out to the child. Also, any action that may 
be occurring with the objects can be pointed out (i.e., the bear 
might be running or jumping - so point out those words). 
4. Spend no more than the attention span allows with each book 
(make it an enjoyable, fun occasion) - let go of any expectations of 
the child. Make time to allow the child full reign of expression and 
interpretation with their books. Encourage them to get elaborate 
and to escalate their stories. Let them go on and on about their 
story. 
5. Repeat these exercises at different times through the day and at 
bedtime. Seek times that encourage the child to relax and enjoy the 
experience. Changing the times and places that reading is done 
tends to discourage anchoring the reading experience to specific 
times or places. If, for example, childhood reading is done only at 
bedtime, later reading experiences will tend to bring on drowsiness 
and lower comprehension. So, choose various times of day to read 
with the child. 


 

The process of teaching reading to children can take years. As soon as the 
child is able, teach them how to light-speed read using the adult course. 

 

 


Baseline And Forecast 

Baseline Scores 

Reader’s Name: Date: 

Test Results - Reading Speed: WPM 

Reading Comprehension: % 

Statement of Intent What I want from this course: 

 

 

End Results Forecast 

Imagine you have already completed the course and you are reviewing your 
progress. This is the result: 

I read at least words per minute. 

I comprehend at least % of what I read. 

My image of myself after completing the course: 

I ... 

Am 

 

 

Do 

 

 

Have 


Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) 

 



 

Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) 

 



 

Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) 

 



 


Resources 

 

Joseph Bennette 

Practitioner in RET, EFT, Hypnotherapy, and Life Skills training. Offering 
Mind Machines, workshops, and private sessions. 

Joseph Bennette, MRET, DCH, PhD 700 Bellevue St SE Suite 120 Salem, 
OR 97301 

www.jbennette.com joseph@jbennette.com 503-375-0146 

 

The Rapid Eye Institute 

Learn Rapid Eye Technology, purchase eye patches, and more. 

581 Lancaster Dr SE suite 270 Salem, OR, 97301-5642 1-888-399-1181 

www.rapideyetechnology.com 

 

Theta Technologies 

Purchase Mind Machines. 

P.O. Box 130 Falls City, WA, 98024 1-800-395-9148 Mind Machines, 
Biofeedback machines. 

 

Emotional Freedom Techniques 

Learn the entire EFT therapy model free. Read accounts of others and chat 
with practitioners and laymen about EFT. 

Gary H. Craig P.O. Box 398, The Sea Ranch, CA 95497 (707) 785-2848 

www.emofree.com 

 

Learning Strategies Corporation 

Home of PhotoReading speed reading course. Available from Learning 
Strategies Corporation are a number of quality courses for achievement, 
enlightenment, and professional development. 

900 East Wayzata Boulevard 

Wayzata, Minnesota 55391-1836 USA 

952-476-9200 

800-735-8273 

FAX 952-475-2373 


www.LearningStrategies.com 


