Harry and Hermione turned around, surprised. Professor McGonagall,
Transfiguration teacher and head of Gryffindor House, was calling over
the heads of the crowd. She was a sternlooking witch who wore her hair
in a tight bun; her sharp eyes were framed with square spectacles. Harry
fought his way over to her with a feeling of foreboding: Professor
McGonagall had a way of making him feel he must have done something
wrong.
"There's no need to look so worried -- I just want a word in MY office,"
she told them. "Move along there, Weasley."
Ron stared as Professor McGonagall ushered Harry and Hermione away from
the chattering crowd; they accompanied her across the entrance hall, up
the marble staircase, and along a corridor.
Once they were in her office, a small room with a large, welcoming fire,
Professor McGonagall motioned Harry and Hermione to sit down. She
settled herself behind her desk and said abruptly, "Professor Lupin sent
an owl ahead to say that you were taken ill on the train, Potter."
Before Harry could reply, there was a soft knock on the door and Madam
Pomfrey, the nurse, came bustling in.
Harry felt himself going red in the face. It was bad enough that he'd
passed out, or whatever he had done, without everyone making all this
fuss.
"I'm fine," he said, "I don't need anything
"Oh, it's you, is it?" said Madam Pomfrey, ignoring this and bending
down to stare closely at him. "I suppose you've been doing something
dangerous again?"
"It was a dementor, Poppy," said Professor McGonagall.
They exchanged a dark look, and Madam Pomfrey clucked disapprovingly.
"Setting dementors around a school, she muttered, pushing back Harry's
hair and feeling his forehead. "He won't be the last one who collapses.
Yes, he's all clammy. Terrible things, they are, and the effect they
have on people who are already delicate
"I'm not delicate!" said Harry crossly.
"Of course you're not," said Madam Pomfrey absentmindedly, now taking
his pulse.
"What does he need?" said Professor McGonagall crisply. "Bed rest?
Should he perhaps spend tonight in the hospital wing?"
"I'm fine!" said Harry, jumping up. The thought of what Draco Malfoy
would say if he had to go to the hospital wing was torture.
"Well, he should have some chocolate, at the very least," said Madam
Pomfrey, who was now trying to peer into Harry's eyes.
"I've already had some," said Harry. "Professor Lupin gave me some. He
gave it to all of us."
"Did he, now?" said Madam Pomfrey approvingly. "So we've finally got a
Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher who knows his remedies?"
"Are you sure you feel all right, Potter?" Professor McGonagall said
sharply.
"Yes, "said Harry.
"Very well. Kindly wait outside while I have a quick word with Miss
Granger about her course schedule, then we can go down to the feast
together."
Harry went back into the corridor with Madam Pomfrey, who left for the
hospital wing, muttering to herself He had to wait only a few minutes;
then Hermione emerged looking very happy about something, followed by
Professor McGonagall, and the three of them made their way back down the
marble staircase to the Great Hall.
It was a sea of pointed black hats; each of the long House tables was
lined with students, their faces glimmering by the light of thousands of
candles, which were floating over the tables in midair. Professor
Flitwick, who was a tiny little wizard with a shock of white hair, was
carrying an ancient hat and a three-legged stool out of the hall.
"Oh," said Hermione softly, "we've missed the Sorting!"
New students at Hogwarts were sorted into Houses by trying on the
sorting Hat, which shouted out the House they were best suited to
(Gryffindor, Ravenclaw, Hufflepuff, or Slytherin). Professor McGonagall
strode off toward her empty seat at the staff table, and Harry and
Hermione set off in the other direction, as quietly as possible, toward
the Gryffindor table. People looked around at them as they passed along
the back of the hall, and a few of them pointed at Harry. Had the story
of his collapsing in front of the dementor traveled that fast?
He and Hermione sat down on either side of Ron, who had saved them
seats.
"What was all that about?" he muttered to Harry.
Harry started to explain in a whisper, but at that moment the headmaster
stood up to speak, and he broke off.
Professor Dumbledore, though very old, always gave an impression of
great energy. He had several feet of long silver hair and beard,
half-moon spectacles, and an extremely crooked nose. He was often
described as the greatest wizard of the age, but that wasn't why Harry
respected him. You couldn't help trusting Albus Dumbledore, and as Harry
watched him beaming around at the students, he felt really calm for the
first time since the dementor had entered the train compartment.
"Welcome!" said Dumbledore, the candlelight shimmering on his beard.
"Welcome to another year at Hogwarts! I have a few things to say to you
all, and as one of them is very serious, I think it best to get it out
of the way before you become befuddled by our excellent feast...."
Dumbledore cleared his throat and continued, "As you will all be aware
after their search of the Hogwarts Express, our school is presently
playing host to some of the dementors of Azkaban, who are here on
Ministry of Magic business."
He paused, and Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley had said about
Dumbledore not being happy with the dementors guarding the school.
"They are stationed at every entrance to the grounds," Dumbledore
continued, "and while they are with us, I must make it plain that nobody
is to leave school without permission. Dementors are not to be fooled by
tricks or disguises -- or even Invisibility Cloaks," he added blandly,
and Harry and Ron glanced at each other. "It is not in the nature of a
dementor to understand pleading or excuses. I therefore warn each and
every one of you to give them no reason to harm you. I look to the
prefects, and our new Head Boy and Girl, to make sure that no student
runs afoul of the dementors," he said.
Percy, who was sitting a few seats down from Harry, puffed out his chest
again and stared around impressively. Dumbledore paused again; he looked
very seriously around the hall, and nobody moved or made a sound.
"On a happier note," he continued, I am pleased to welcome two new
teachers to our ranks this year.
"First, Professor Lupin, who has kindly consented to fill the post of
Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher."
There was some scattered, rather unenthusiastic applause. Only those who
had been in the compartment on the train with Professor Lupin clapped
hard, Harry among them. Professor Lupin looked particularly shabby next
to all the other teachers in their best robes.
"Look at Snape!" Ron hissed in Harry's ear.
Professor Snape, the Potions master, was staring along the staff table
at Professor Lupin. It was common knowledge that Snape ,anted the
Defense Against the Dark Arts job, but even Harry, who hated Snape, was
startled at the expression twisting his thin, sallow face. it was beyond
anger: it was loathing. Harry knew that expression only too well; it was
the look Snape wore every time he set eyes on Harry.
"As to our second new appointment," Dumbledore continued as the lukewarm
applause for Professor Lupin died away. "Well, I am sorry to tell you
that Professor Kettleburn, our Care of Magical Creatures teacher,
retired at the end of last year in order to enjoy more time with his
remaining limbs. However, I am delighted to say that his place will be
filled by none other than Rubeus Hagrid, who has agreed to take on this
teaching job in addition to his gamekeeping duties."
Harry, Ron, and Hermione stared at one another, stunned. Then they
joined in with the applause, which was tumultuous at the Gryffindor
table in particular. Harry leaned forward to see Hagrid, who was
ruby-red in the face and staring down at his enormous hands, his wide
grin hidden in the tangle of his black beard.
"We should've known!" Ron roared, pounding the table. "Who else would
have assigned us a biting book?"
Harry, Ron, and Hermione were the last to stop clapping, and as
Professor Dumbledore started speaking again, they saw that Hagrid was
wiping his eyes on the tablecloth.
"Well, I think that's everything of importance," said Dumbledore. "Let
the feast begin!"
The golden plates and goblets before them filled suddenly with food and
drink. Harry, suddenly ravenous, helped himself to everything he could
reach and began to eat.
It was a delicious feast; the hall echoed with talk, laughter, and the
clatter of knives and forks. Harry, Ron, and Hermione, however, were
eager for it to finish so that they could talk to Hagrid. They knew how
much being made a teacher would mean to him. Hagrid wasn't a fully
qualified wizard; he had been expelled from Hogwarts in his third year
for a crime he had not committed. It had been Harry, Ron, and Hermione
who had cleared Hagrid's name last year.
At long last, when the last morsels of pumpkin tart had melted from the
golden platters, Dumbledore gave the word that it was time for them all
to go to bed, and they got their chance.
"Congratulations, Hagrid!" Hermione squealed as they reached the
teachers' table.
"All down ter you three," said Hagrid, wiping his shining face on his
napkin as he looked up at them., "Can' believe it... great man,
Dumbledore... came straight down to me hut after Professor Kettleburn
said he'd had enough.... It's what I always wanted. --"
Overcome with emotion, he buried his face in his napkin, and Professor
McGonagall shooed them away.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined the Gryffindors streaming up the marble
staircase and, very tired now, along more corridors, UP more and more
stairs, to the hidden entrance to Gryffindor Tower's large portrait of a
fat lady in a pink dress asked them, "Password?"
"Coming through, coming through!" Percy called from behind the crowd.
"The new password's 'Fortuna Major'!"
"Oh no," said Neville Longbottom sadly. He always had trouble
remembering the passwords.
Through the portrait hole and across the common room, the girls and boys
divided toward their separate staircases. Harry climbed the spiral stair
with no thought in his head except how glad he was to be back. They
reached their familiar, circular dormitory with its five four-poster
beds, and Harry, looking around, felt he was home at last.
TALONS AND TEA LEAVES
When Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the Great Hall for breakfast the
next day, the first thing they saw was Draco Malfoy, who seemed to be
entertaining a large group of Slytherins with a very funny story. As
they passed, Malfoy did a ridiculous impression of a swooning fit and
there was a roar of laughter.
"Ignore him," said Hermione, who was right behind Harry. "Just ignore
him, it's not worth it...."
"Hey, Potter!" shrieked Pansy Parkinson, a Slytherin girl with a face
like a pug. "Potter! The dementors are coming, Potter! Woooooooooo!"
Harry dropped into a seat at the Gryffindor table, next to George
Weasley.
"New third-year course schedules," said George, passing then, over.
"What's up with you, Harry?"
"Malfoy," said Ron, sitting down on George's other side and glaring over
at the Slytherin table.
George looked up in time to see Malfoy pretending to faint with terror
again.
"That little git," he said calmly. "He wasn't so cocky last night when
the dementors were down at our end of the train. Came runing into our
compartment, didn't he, Fred?"
"Nearly wet himself," said Fred, with a contemptuous glance at Malfoy.
"I wasn't too happy myself," said George. "They're horrible things,
those dementors...."
"Sort of freeze your insides, don't they?" said Fred.
"You didn't pass out, though, did you?" said Harry in a low voice.
"Forget it, Harry," said George bracingly. "Dad had to go out to Azkaban
one time, remember, Fred? And he said it was the worst place he'd ever
been, he came back all weak and shaking.... They suck the happiness out
of a place, dementors. Most of the prisoners go mad in there."
"Anyway, we'll see how happy Malfoy looks after our first Quidditch
match," said Fred. "Gryffindor versus Slytherin, first game of the
season, remember?"
The only time Harry and Malfoy had faced each other in a Quidditch
match, Malfoy had definitely come off worse. Feeling slightly more
cheerful, Harry helped himself to sausages and fried tomatoes.
Hermione was examining her new schedule.
" Ooh, good, we're starting some new subjects today," she said happily.
villains are these, that trespass upon my private lands! Come I. scorn
at my fall, perchance? Draw, you knaves, you dogs!"
They watched in astonishment as the little knight tugged his sword out
of its scabbard and began brandishing it violently, hopping up and down
in rage. But the sword was too long for him; a particularly wild swing
made him overbalance, and he landed facedown in the grass.
"Are you all right?" said Harry, moving closer to the picture.
"Get back, you scurvy braggart! Back, you rogue!"
The knight seized his sword again and used it to push himself back up,
but the blade sank deeply into the grass and, though he pulled with all
his might, he couldn't get it out again. Finally, he had to flop back
down onto the grass and push up his visor to mop his sweating face.
"Listen," said Harry, taking advantage of the knight's exhaustion,
"we're looking for the North Tower. You don't know the way, do you?"
"A quest!" The knight's rage seemed to vanish instantly. He clanked to
his feet and shouted, "Come follow me, dear friends, and we shall find
our goal, or else shall perish bravely in the charge!"
He gave the sword another fruitless tug, tried and failed to mount the
fat pony, gave up, and cried, "On foot then, good sirs and gentle lady!
On! On!"
And he ran, clanking loudly, into the left side of the frame and out of
sight.
They hurried after him along the corridor, following the sound of his
armor. Every now and then they spotted him running through a picture
ahead.
"Be of stout heart, the worst is yet to come!" yelled the knight, and
they saw him reappear in front of an alarmed group of women in
crinolines, whose picture hung on the wall of a narrow spiral staircase.
Puffing loudly, Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the tightly spiraling
steps, getting dizzier and dizzier, until at last they heard the murmur
of voices above them and knew they had reached the classroom.
"Farewell!" cried the knight, popping his head into a painting of some
sinister-looking monks. "Farewell, my comrades-in-arms! If ever you have
need of noble heart and steely sinew, call upon Sir Cadogan!"
"Yeah, we'll call you," muttered Ron as the knight disappeared, "if we
ever need someone mental."
They climbed the last few steps and emerged onto a tiny landing, where
most of the class was already assembled. There were no doors off this
landing, but Ron nudged Harry and pointed at the ceiling, where there
was a circular trapdoor with a brass plaque on it.
"'Sibyll Trelawney, Divination teacher,"' Harry read. "How're we
supposed to get up there?"
As though in answer to his question, the trapdoor suddenly opened, and a
silvery ladder descended right at Harry's feet. Everyone got quiet.
"After you," said Ron, grinning, so Harry climbed the ladder first.
He emerged into the strangest-looking classroom he had ever seen. In
fact, it didn't look like a classroom at all, more like a cross between
someone's attic and an old-fashioned tea shop. At leasttwenty small,
circular tables were crammed inside it, all surrounded by chintz
armchairs and fat little poufs. Everything was lit with a dim, crimson
light; the curtains at the windows were all closed, and the many lamps
were draped with dark red scarves. it was stiflingly warm, and the fire
that was burning under the crowded mantelpiece was giving off a heavy,
sickly sort of perfume as it heated a large copper kettle. The shelves
running around the circular walls were crammed with dusty-looking
feathers, stubs of candles, many packs of tattered playing cards,
countless silvery crystal balls, and a huge array of teacups.
Ron appeared at Harry's shoulder as the class assembled around them, all
talking in whispers.
"Where is she?" Ron said.
A voice came suddenly out of the shadows, a soft, misty sort of voice.
"Welcome," it said. "How nice to see you in the physical world at last."
Harry's immediate impression was of a large, glittering insect.
Professor Trelawney moved into the firelight, and they saw that she was
very thin; her large glasses magnified her eyes to several times their
natural size, and she was draped in a gauzy spangled shawl. Innumerable
chains and beads hung around her spindly neck, and her arms and hands
were encrusted with bangles and rings.
"Sit, my children, sit," she said, and they all climbed awkwardly into
armchairs or sank onto poufs. Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat themselves
around the same round table.
"Welcome to Divination," said Professor Trelawney, who had seated
herself in a winged armchair in front of the fire. "My name is professor
Trelawney. You may not have seen me before. I find that descending too
often into the hustle and bustle of the main school clouds my Inner
Eye."
Nobody said anything to this extraordinary pronouncement. Professor
Trelawney delicately rearranged her shawl and continued, "So you have
chosen to study Divination, the most difficult of all magical arts. I
must warn you at the outset that if you do not have the Sight, there is
very little I will be able to teach you.. Books can take you only so far
in this field...."
At these words, both Harry and Ron glanced, grinning, at Hermione, who
looked startled at the news that books wouldn't be much help in this
subject.
"Many witches and wizards, talented though they are in the area of loud
bangs and smells and sudden disappearings, are yet unable to penetrate
the veiled mysteries of the future," Professor Trelawney went on, her
enormous, gleaming eyes moving from face to nervous face. "It is a Gift
granted to few. You, boy," she said suddenly to Neville, who almost
toppled off his pouf. "Is your grandmother well?"
"I think so," said Neville tremulously.
"I wouldn't be so sure if I were you, dear," said Professor Trelawney,
the firelight glinting on her long emerald earrings. Neville gulped.
Professor Trelawney continued placidly. "We will be covering the basic
methods of Divination this year. The first term will be devoted to
reading the tea leaves. Next term we shall progress to palmistry. By the
way, my dear," she shot suddenly at Parvati Patil, "beware a red-haired
man."
Parvati gave a startled look at Ron, who was right behind her and edged
her chair away from him.
"In the second term," Professor Trelawney went on, "we shall progress to
the crystal ball -- if we have finished with fire omens, that is.
Unfortunately, classes will be disrupted in February by a nasty bout of
flu. I myself will lose my voice. And around Easter, one of our number
will leave us forever."
A very tense silence followed this pronouncement, but Professor
Trelawney seemed unaware of it.
"I wonder, dear," she said to Lavender Brown, who was nearest and shrank
back in her chair, "if you could pass me the largest silver teapot?"
Lavender, looking relieved, stood up, took an enormous teapot from the
shelf, and put it down on the table in front of Professor Trelawney.
"Thank you, my dear. Incidentally, that thing you are dreading -- it
will happen on Friday the sixteenth of October."
Lavender trembled.
"Now, I want you all to divide into pairs. Collect a teacup from the
shelf, come to me, and I will fill it. Then sit down and drink, drink
until only the dregs remain. Swill these around the cup three times with
the left hand, then turn the cup upside down on its saucer, wait for the
last of the tea to drain away, then give your cup to your partner to
read. You will interpret the patterns using pages five and six of
Unfogging the Future. I shall move among you, helping and instructing.
Oh, and dear" -- she caught Neville by the arm as he made to stand up --
"after you've broken your first cup, would you be so kind as to select
one of the blue patterned ones? I'm rather attached to the pink."
Sure enough, Neville had no sooner reached the shelf of teacups when
there was a tinkle of breaking china. Professor Trelawney swept over to
him holding a dustpan and brush and said, "One of the blue ones, then,
dear, if you wouldn't mind... thank you. ... "
When Harry and Ron had had their teacups filled, they went back to their
table and tried to drink the scalding tea quickly. They swilled the
dregs around as Professor Trelawney had instructed, then drained the
cups and swapped over.
"Right," said Ron as they both opened their books at pages five and six.
"What can you see in mine?"
"A load of soggy brown stuff," said Harry. The heavily perfumed smoke in
the room was making him feel sleepy and stupid.
"Broaden your minds, my dears, and allow your eyes to see past the
mundane!" Professor Trelawney cried through the gloom.
Harry tried to pull himself together.
"Right, you've got a crooked sort of cross... " He consulted Unfogging
the Future. "That means you're going to have 'trials and suffering' --
sorry about that -- but there's a thing that could be the sun... hang
on... that means 'great happiness'... so you're going to suffer but be
very happy...."
"You need your Inner Eye tested, if you ask me," said Ron, and they both
had to stifle their laughs as Professor Trelawney gazed in their
direction.
"My turn..." Ron peered into Harry's teacup, his forehead wrinkled with
effort. "There's a blob a bit like a bowler hat," he said. "Maybe you're
going to work for the Ministry of Magic...
He turned the teacup the other way up.
"But this way it looks more like an acorn.... What's that?" He scanned
his copy of Unfogging the Future. "'A windfall, unexpected gold.'
Excellent, you can lend me some... and there's a thin, here," he turned
the cup again, "that looks like an animal... yeah, if that was its
head... it looks like a hippo... no, a sheep..."
Professor Trelawney whirled around as Harry let out a snort of laughter.
"Let me see that, my dear," she said reprovingly to Ron, sweeping over
and snatching Harry's cup from him. Everyone went quiet to watch.
Professor Trelawney was staring into the teacup, rotating it
counterclockwise.
"The falcon... my dear, you have a deadly enemy."
"But everyone knows that, " said Hermione in a loud whisper. Professor
Trelawney stared at her.
"Well, they do," said Hermione. "Everybody knows about Harry and
You-Know-Who."
Harry and Ron stared at her with a mixture of amazement and admiration.
They had never heard Hermione speak to a teacher like that before.
Professor Trelawney chose not to reply. She lowered her huge eyes to
Harry's cup again and continued to turn it.
"The club... an attack. Dear, dear, this is not a happy cup....
I thought that was a bowler hat," said Ron sheepishly.
"The skull... danger in your path, my dear...."
Everyone was staring, transfixed, at Professor Trelawney, who gave the
cup a final turn, gasped, and then screamed.
There was another tinkle of breaking china; Neville had smashed his
second cup. Professor Trelawney sank into a vacant armchair, her
glittering hand at her heart and her eyes closed.
"My dear boy... my poor, dear boy no it is kinder not to say.. . no...
don't ask me...."
"What is it, Professor?" said Dean Thomas at once. Everyone had got to
their feet, and slowly they crowded around Harry and Ron's table,
pressing close to Professor Trelawney's chair to get a
good look at Harry's cup.
"My dear," Professor Trelawney's huge eyes opened dramatically,
"You have the Grim."
"The what?" said Harry.
He could tell that he wasn't the only one who didn't understand; Dean
Thomas shrugged at him and Lavender Brown looked puzzled, but nearly
everybody else clapped their hands to their mouths in horror.
"The Grim, my dear, the Grim!" cried Professor Trelawney, who looked
shocked that Harry hadn't understood. "The giant, spectral dog that
haunts churchyards! My dear boy, it is an omen -- the worst omen -- of
death!"
Harry's stomach lurched. That dog on the cover of Death Omens in
Flourish and Blotts -the dog in the shadows of Magnolia Crescent...
Lavender Brown clapped her hands to her mouth too. Everyone was looking
at Harry, everyone except Hermione, who had gotten up and moved around
to the back of Professor Trelawney's chair.
"I don't think it looks like a Grim," she said flatly.
Professor Trelawney surveyed Hermione with mounting dislike.
"You'll forgive me for saying so, my dear, but I perceive very little
aura around you. Very little receptivity to the resonances of the
future." Seamus Finnigan was tilting his head from side to side.
"It looks like a Grim if you do this," he said, with his eyes almost
shut, "but it looks more like a donkey from here," he said, leaning to
the left.
"When you've all finished deciding whether I'm going to die Or not!"
said Harry, taking even himself by surprise. Now nobody seemed to want
to look at him.
"I think we will leave the lesson here for today," said Professor
Trelawney in her mistiest voice. "Yes... please pack away your
things...."
Silently the class took their teacups back to Professor Trelawney,
packed away their books, and closed their bags. Even Ron was avoiding
Harry's eyes.
"Until we meet again," said Professor Trelawney faintly, "fair fortune
be yours. Oh, and dear" -- she pointed at Neville -- "you'll be late
next time, so mind you work extra-hard to catch up."
Harry, Ron, and Hermione descended Professor Trelawney's ladder and the
winding stair in silence, then set off for Professor McGonagall's
Transfiguration lesson. It took them so long to find her classroom that,
early as they had left Divination, they were only just in time.
Harry chose a seat right at the back of the room, feeling as though he
were sitting in a very bright spotlight; the rest of the class kept
shooting furtive glances at him, as though he were about to drop dead at
any moment. He hardly heard what Professor McGonagall was telling them
about Animagi (wizards who could transform at will into animals), and
wasn't even watching when she transformed herself in front of their eyes
into a tabby cat with spectacle markings around her eyes.
"Really, what has got into you all today?" said Professor McGonagall,
turning back into herself with a faint pop, and staring around at them
all. "Not that it matters, but that's the first time my transformation's
not got applause from a class."
Everybody's heads turned toward Harry again, but nobody spoke. Then
Hermione raised her hand.
"Please, Professor, we've just had our first Divination class, and we
were reading the tea leaves, and --"
"Ah, of course," said Professor McGonagall, suddenly frowning.
"There is no need to say any more, Miss Granger. Tell me, which of you
will be dying this year?"
Everyone stared at her.
"Me," said Harry, finally.
"I see," said Professor McGonagall, fixing Harry with her beady eyes.
"Then you should know, Potter, that Sibyll Trelawney has predicted the
death of one student a year since she arrived at this school. None of
them has died yet. Seeing death omens is her favorite way of greeting a
new class. If it were not for the fact that I never speak ill of my
colleagues --"
Professor McGonagall broke off, and they saw that her nostrils had gone
white. She went on, more calmly, "Divination is one of the most
imprecise branches of magic. I shall not conceal from you that I have
very little patience with it. True Seers are very rare, and Professor
Trelawney --"
She stopped again, and then said, in a very matter-of-fact tone, "You
look in excellent health to me, Potter, so you will excuse me if I don't
let you off homework today. I assure you that if you die, you need not
hand it in."
Hermione laughed. Harry felt a bit better. It was harder to feel scared
of a lump of tea leaves away from the dim red light and befuddling
perfume of Professor Trelawney's classroom. Not everyone was convinced,
however. Ron still looked worried, and Lavender whispered, "But what
about Neville's cup?"
When the Transfiguration class had finished, they joined the crowd
thundering toward the Great Hall for lunch.
"Ron, cheer up," said Hermione, pushing a dish of stew toward him. "You
heard what Professor McGonagall said."
Ron spooned stew onto his plate and picked up his fork but didn't start.
"Harry," he said, in a low, serious voice, "You haven't seen a great
black dog anywhere, have you?"
"Yeah, I have," said Harry. "I saw one the night I left the Dursleys'. "
Ron let his fork fall with a clatter.
"Probably a stray," said Hermione calmly.
Ron looked at Hermione as though she had gone mad.
"Hermione, if Harry's seen a Grim, that's -- that's bad," he said. "My
-- my uncle Bilius saw one and -- and he died twenty-four hours later!"
"Coincidence," said Hermione airily, pouring herself some pumpkin juice.
"You don't know what you're talking about!" said Ron, starting to get
angry. "Grims scare the living daylights out of most wizards!"
"There you are, then," said Hermione in a superior tone. "They see the
Grim and die of fright. The Grim's not an omen, it's the cause of death!
And Harry's still with us because he's not stupid enough to see one and
think, right, well, I'd better kick the bucket then!"
Ron mouthed wordlessly at Hermione, who opened her bag, took out her new
Arithmancy book, and propped it open against the juice jug.
"I think Divination seems very woolly," she said, searching for her
page. "A lot of guesswork, if you ask me."
"There was nothing woolly about the Grim in that cup!" said Ron hotly.
"You didn't seem quite so confident when you were telling Harry it was a
sheep," said Hermione coolly.
"Professor Trelawney said you didn't have the right aura! You just don't
like being bad at something for a change!"
He had touched a nerve. Hermione slammed her Arithmancy book down on the
table so hard that bits of meat and carrot flew everywhere.
"If being good at Divination means I have to pretend to see death omens
in a lump of tea leaves, I'm not sure I'll be studying it much longer!
That lesson was absolute rubbish compared with my Arithmancy class!"
She snatched up her bag and stalked away.
Ron frowned after her.
"What's she talking about?" he said to Harry. "She hasn't been to an
Arithmancy class yet."
Harry was pleased to get out of the castle after lunch. Yesterday's rain
had cleared; the sky was a clear, pale gray, and the grass was springy
and damp underfoot as they set off for their first ever Care of Magical
Creatures class.
Ron and Hermione weren't speaking to each other. Harry walked beside
them in silence as they went down the sloping lawns to Hagrid's hut on
the edge of the Forbidden Forest. It was only when he spotted three
only-too- familiar backs ahead of them that he realized they must be
having these lessons with the Slytherins. Malfoy was talking animatedly
to Crabbe and Goyle, who were chortling. Harry was quite sure he knew
what they were talking about.
Hagrid was waiting for his class at the door of his hut. He stood in his
moleskin overcoat, with Fang the boarhound at his heels, looking
impatient to start.
"C'mon, now, get a move on!" he called as the class approached. "Got a
real treat for yeh today! Great lesson comin' up! Everyone here? Right,
follow me!"
For one nasty moment, Harry thought that Hagrid was going to lead them
into the forest; Harry had had enough unpleasant experiences in there to
last him a lifetime. However, Hagrid strolled off around the edge of the
trees, and five minutes later, they found themselves outside a kind of
paddock. There was nothing in there.
"Everyone gather 'round the fence here!" he called. "That's it -- make
sure yeh can see -- now, firs' thing yeh'll want ter do is open yer
books --"
"How?" said the cold, drawling voice of Draco Malfoy.
"Eh?" said Hagrid.
"How do we open our books?" Malfoy repeated. He took out his copy of The
Monster Book of Monsters, which he had bound shut with a length of rope.
Other people took theirs out too; some, like Harry, had belted their
book shut; others had crammed them inside tight bags or clamped them
together with binder clips.
"Hasn' -- hasn' anyone bin able ter open their books?" said Hagrid,
looking crestfallen.
The class all shook their heads.
"Yeh've got ter stroke 'em," said Hagrid, as though this was the most
obvious thing in the world. "Look --"
He took Hermione's copy and ripped off the Spellotape that bound it. The
book tried to bite, but Hagrid ran a giant forefinger down its spine,
and the book shivered, and then fell open and lay quiet in his hand.
"Oh, how silly we've all been!" Malfoy sneered. "We should have stroked
them! why didn't we guess!"
"I -- I thought they were funny," Hagrid said uncertainly to Hermione.
"Oh, tremendously funny!" said Malfoy. "Really witty, giving us books
that try and rip our hands off!"
"Shut up, Malfoy," said Harry quietly. Hagrid was looking downcast and
Harry wanted Hagrid's first lesson to be a success.
"Righ' then," said Hagrid, who seemed to have lost his thread, "so -- so
yeh've got yer books an' -- an' - - now yeh need the Magical Creatures.
Yeah. So I'll go an' get 'em. Hang on... "
He strode away from them into the forest and out of sight.
"God, this place is going to the dogs," said Malfoy loudly. "That oaf
teaching classes, my father'll have a fit when I tell him
"Shut up, Malfoy," Harry repeated.
"Careful, Potter, there's a dementor behind you
"Oooooooh!" squealed Lavender Brown, pointing toward the opposite side
of the paddock.
Trotting toward them were a dozen of the most bizarre creatures Harry
had ever seen. They had the bodies, hind legs, and tails of horses, but
the front legs, wings, and heads of what seemed to be giant eagles, with
cruel, steel-colored beaks and large, brilliantly, orange eyes. The
talons on their front legs were half a foot long and deadly looking.
Each of the beasts had a thick leather collar around its neck, which was
attached to a long chain, and the ends of all of these were held in the
vast hands of Hagrid, who came jogging into the paddock behind the
creatures.
"Gee up, there!" he roared, shaking the chains and urging the creatures
toward the fence where the class stood. Everyone drew back slightly as
Hagrid reached them and tethered the creatures to the fence.
"Hippogriffs!" Hagrid roared happily, waving a hand at them. "Beau'iful,
aren' they?"
Harry could sort of see what Hagrid meant. Once you got over the first
shock of seeing something that was, half horse, half bird, you started
to appreciate the hippogriffs' gleaming coats, changing smoothly from
feather to hair, each of them a different color: stormy gray, bronze,
pinkish roan, gleaming chestnut, and inky black.
"So," said Hagrid, rubbing his hands together and beaming around, "if
yeh wan' ter come a bit nearer --"
No one seemed to want to. Harry, Ron, and Hermione, however, approached
the fence cautiously.
"Now, firs' thing yeh gotta know abou' hippogriffs is, they're proud,"
said Hagrid. "Easily offended, hippogriffs are. Don't never insult one,
'cause it might be the last thing yeh do."
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle weren't listening; they were talking in an
undertone and Harry had a nasty feeling they were plotting how best to
disrupt the lesson.
"Yeh always wait fer the hippogriff ter make the firs' move," Hagrid
continued. "It's polite, see? Yeh walk toward him, and yeh bow, an' yeh
wait. If he bows back, yeh're allowed ter touch him. If he doesn' bow,
then get away from him sharpish, 'cause those talons hurt.
"Right -- who wants ter go first?"
Most of the class backed farther away in answer. Even Harry, Ron, and
Hermione had misgivings. The hippogriffs were tossing their fierce heads
and flexing their powerful wings; they didn't seem to like being
tethered like this.
"No one?" said Hagrid, with a pleading look.
"I'll do it," said Harry.
There was an intake of breath from behind him, and both Lavender and
Parvati whispered, "Oooh, no, Harry, remember your tea leaves!"
Harry ignored them. He climbed over the paddock fence.
"Good man, Harry!" roared Hagrid. "Right then -- let's see how yeh get
on with Buckbeak."
He untied one of the chains, pulled the gray hippogriff away from its
fellows, and slipped off its leather collar. The class on the other side
of the paddock seemed to be holding its breath. Malfoy's eyes were
narrowed maliciously.
"Easy) now, Harry," said Hagrid quietly. "Yeh've got eye contact, now
try not ter blink.... Hippogriffs don' trust yeh if yeh blink too
much...."
Harry's eyes immediately began to water, but he didn't shut thern.
Buckbeak had turned his great, sharp head and was staring at Harry with
one fierce orange eye. "Tha's it," said Hagrid. "Tha's it, Harry... now,
bow."
Harry didn't feel much like exposing the back of his neck to Buckbeak,
but he did as he was told. He gave a short bow and then looked up.
The hippogriff was still staring haughtily at him. It didn't move.
"Ah," said Hagrid, sounding worried. "Right -- back away, now, Harry,
easy does it
But then, to Harry's enormous surprise, the hippogriff suddenly bent its
scaly front knees and sank into what was an unmistakable bow.
"Well done, Harry!" said Hagrid, ecstatic. "Right -- yeh can touch him!
Pat his beak, go on!"
Feeling that a better reward would have been to back away, Harry moved
slowly toward the hippogriff and reached out toward it. He patted the
beak several times and the hippogriff closed its eyes lazily, as though
enjoying it.
The class broke into applause, all except for Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle,
who were looking deeply disappointed.
"Righ' then, Harry," said Hagrid. "I reckon he might' let yeh ride him!"
This was more than Harry had bargained for. He was used to a broomstick;
but he wasn't sure a hippogriff would be quite the same.
"Yeh climb up there, jus' behind the wing joint," said Hagrid, "an' mind
yeh don' pull any of his feathers out, he won' like that...."
Harry put his foot on the top of Buckbeaks wing and hoisted himself onto
its back. Buckbeak stood up. Harry wasn't sure where to hold on;
everything in front of him was covered with feathers.
"Go on, then'" roared Hagrid, slapping the hippogriffs hindquarters.
Without warning, twelve-foot wings flapped open on either side of Harry,
he just had time to seize the hippogriff around the neck before he was
soaring upward. It was nothing like a broomstick, and Harry knew which
one he preferred; the hippogriff's wings beat uncomfortably on either
side of him, catching him under his legs and making him feel he was
about to be thrown off; the glossy feathers slipped under his fingers
and he didn't dare get a stronger grip; instead of the smooth action of
his Nimbus Two Thousand, he now felt himself rocking backward and
forward as the hindquarters of the hippogriff rose and fell with its
wings.
Buckbeak flew him once around the paddock and then headed back to the
ground; this was the bit Harry had been dreading; he leaned back as the
smooth neck lowered, feeling he was going to slip off over the beak,
then felt a heavy thud as the four ill-assorted feet hit the ground. He
just managed to hold on and push himself straight again.
"Good work, Harry!" roared Hagrid as everyone except Malfoy, Crabbe, and
Goyle cheered. "Okay, who else wants a go?"
Emboldened by Harry's success, the rest of the class climbed cautiously
into the paddock. Hagrid untied the hippogriffs one by one, and soon
people were bowing nervously, all over the paddock. Neville ran
repeatedly backward from his, which didn't seem to want to bend its
knees. Ron and Hermione practiced on the chestnut, while Harry watched.
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had taken over Buckbeak. He had bowed to
Malfoy, who was now patting his beak, looking disdainful.
"This is very easy," Malfoy drawled, loud enough for Harry to, hear him.
"I knew it must have been, if Potter could do it.... I bet you're not
dangerous at all, are you?" he said to the hippogriff. "Are you, you
great ugly brute?"
It happened in a flash of steely talons; Malfoy let out a highpitched
scream and next moment, Hagrid was wrestling Buckbeak back into his
collar as he strained to get at Malfoy, who lay curled in the grass,
blood blossoming over his robes.
"I'm dying!" Malfoy yelled as the class panicked. "I'm dying, look at
me! It's killed me!"
"Yer not dyin'!" said Hagrid, who had gone very white. "Someone help me
-- gotta get him outta here --"
Hermione ran to hold open the gate as Hagrid lifted Malfoy easily. As
they passed, Harry saw that there was a long, deep gash on Malfoy's arm;
blood splattered the grass and Hagrid ran with him, up the slope toward
the castle.
Very shaken, the Care of Magical Creatures class followed at a walk. The
Slytherins were all shouting about Hagrid.
"They should fire him straight away!" said Pansy Parkinson, who was in
tears.
"It was Malfoy's fault!" snapped Dean Thomas. Crabbe and Goyle flexed
their muscles threateningly.
They all climbed the stone steps into the deserted entrance hall.
"I'm going to see if he's okay!" said Pansy, and they all watched her
run up the marble staircase. The Slytherins, still muttering about
Hagrid, headed away in the direction of their dungeon common room;
Harry, Ron, and Hermione proceeded upstairs to Gryffindor Tower.
"You think he'll be all right?" said Hermione nervously.
"Course he will. Madam Pomfrey can mend cuts in about a second," said
Harry, who had had far worse injuries mended magically by the nurse.
"That was a really bad thing to happen in Hagrid's first class, though,
wasn't it?" said Ron, looking worried. "Trust Malfoy to mess things up
for him...."
They were among the first to reach the Great Hall at dinnertime, hoping
to see Hagrid, but he wasn't there.
"They wouldn't fire him, would they?" said Hermione anxiously, not
touching her steak-and- kidney pudding.
"They'd better not," said Ron, who wasn't eating either.
Harry was watching the Slytherin table. A large group including Crabbe
and Goyle was huddled together, deep in conversation. Harry was sure
they were cooking up their own version of how Malfoy had been injured.
"Well, you can't say it wasn't an interesting first day back," said Ron
gloomily.
They went up to the crowded Gryffindor common room after dinner and
tried to do the homework Professor McGonagall had given them, but all
three of them kept breaking off and glancing Out of the tower window.
"There's a light on in Hagrid's window," Harry said suddenly.
Ron looked at his watch.
"If we hurried, we could go down and see him. It's still quite early..."
I don't know," Hermione said slowly, and Harry saw her glance at him.
"I'm allowed to walk across the grounds, " he said Pointedly. "Sirius
Black hasn't got past the dementors yet, has he?"
So they put their things away and headed out of the portrait hole, glad
to meet nobody on their way to the front doors, as they weren't entirely
sure they were supposed to be out.
The grass was still wet and looked almost black in the twilight. When
they reached Hagrid's hut, they knocked, and a voice growled, "C'min."
Hagrid was sitting in his shirtsleeves at his scrubbed wooden table; his
boarhound, Fang, had his head in Hagrid's lap. One look told them that
Hagrid had been drinking a lot; there was a pewter tankard almost as big
as a bucket in front of him, and he seemed to be having difficulty
getting them into focus.
"'Spect it's a record," he said thickly, when he recognized them. "Don'
reckon they've ever had a teacher who lasted on'y a day before."
"You haven't been fired, Hagrid!" gasped Hermione.
"Not yet," said Hagrid miserably, taking a huge gulp of whatever was in
the tankard. "But's only a matter o' time, i' n't it, after Malfoy..."
"How is he?" said Ron as they all sat down. "It wasn't serious, was it?"
"Madam Pomfrey fixed him best she could," said Hagrid dully, "but he's
sayin' it's still agony... covered in bandages... moanin'..
"He's faking it, " said Harry at once. "Madam Pomfrey can mend anything.
She regrew half my bones last year. Trust Malfoy to milk it for all it's
worth."
"School gov'nors have bin told, o' course," said Hagrid miseribly. "They
reckon I started too big. Shoulda left hippogriffs fer later... done
flobberworms or summat.... Jus' thought itdmake a good firs' lessons all
my fault...."
"It's all Malfoy's fault, Hagrid!" said Hermione earnestly.
"We're witnesses," said Harry. "You said hippogriffs attack if you
insult them. It's Malfoy's problem that he wasn't listening. We'll tell
Dumbledore what really happened."
"Yeah, don't worry, Hagrid, we'll back you up," said Ron.
Tears leaked out of the crinkled corners of Hagrid's beetle-black eyes.
He grabbed both Harry and Ron and pulled them into a bone-breaking hug.
98
"I think you've had enough to drink, Hagrid," said Hermione firmly. She
took the tankard from the table and went outside to empty it.
"At, maybe she's right," said Hagrid, letting go of Harry and Ron, who
both staggered away, rubbing their ribs. Hagrid heaved himself out of
his chair and followed Hermione unsteadily outside. They heard a loud
splash.
"What's he done?" said Harry nervously as Hermione came back in with the
empty tankard.
"Stuck his head in the water barrel," said Hermione, putting the tankard
away.
Hagrid came back, his long hair and beard sopping wet, wiping the water
out of his eyes.
"That's better," he said, shaking his head like a dog and drenching them
all. "Listen, it was good of yeh ter come an' see me, I really --
Hagrid stopped dead, staring at Harry as though he'd only just realized
he was there.
"WHAT D'YEH THINK YOU'RE DOIN', EH?" he roared, so suddenly that they
jumped a foot in the air. "YEH'RE NOT TO GO WANDERIN' AROUND AFTER
DARK,
HARRY! AN, YOU TWO! LETTIN' HIM!"
Hagrid strode over to Harry, grabbed his arm, and pulled him to the
door.
"C'mon!" Hagrid said angrily. "I'm takin' yer all back up ter school,
an' don' let me catch yeh walkin' down ter see me after dark again. I'm
not worth that!"
THE BOGGART IN THE WARDROBE
Malfoy didn't reappear in classes until late on Thursday morning, when
the Slytherins and Gryffindors were halfway through double Potions. He
swaggered into the dungeon, his right arm covered in bandages and bound
up in a sling, acting, in Harry's opinion, as though he were the heroic
survivor of some dreadful battle.
"How is it, Draco?" simpered Pansy Parkinson. "Does it hurt much?"
"Yeah," said Malfoy, putting on a brave sort of grimace. But Harry saw
him wink at Crabbe and Goyle when Pansy had looked away.
"Settle down, settle down," said Professor Snape idly.
Harry and Ron scowled at each other; Snape wouldn't have said "settle
down" if they'd walked in late, he'd have given them detention. But
Malfoy had always been able to get away with anything in Snape's
classes; Snape was head of Slytherin House, and generality favored his
own students above all others.
They were making a new potion today, a Shrinking Solution. Malfoy set up
his cauldron right next to Harry and Ron, so that they were preparing
their ingredients on the same table.
"Sir," Malfoy called, "sir, I'll need help cutting up these daisy roots,
because of my arm --"
"Weasley, cut up Malfoy's roots for him," said Snape without looking up.
Ron went brick red.
"There's nothing wrong with your arm," he hissed at Malfoy.
Malfoy smirked across the table.
"Weasley, you heard Professor Snape; cut up these roots."
Ron seized his knife, pulled Malfoy's roots toward him, and began to
chop them roughly, so that they were all different sizes.
"Professor," drawled Malfoy, "Weasley's mutilating my roots, sit."
Snape approached their table, stared down his hooked nose at the roots,
then gave Ron an unpleasant smile from beneath his long, greasy black
hair.
"Change roots with Malfoy, Weasley."
"But, sit --!"
Ron had spent the last quarter of an hour carefully shredding his own
roots into exactly equal pieces.
"Now," said Snape in his most dangerous voice.
Ron shoved his own beautifully cut roots across the table a, Malfoy,
then took up the knife again.
"And, sir, I'll need this shrivelfig skinned," said Malfoy, his voice
full of malicious laughter.
"Potter, you can skin Malfoy's shrivelfig," said Snape, giving Harry the
look of loathing he always reserved just for him.
Harry took Malfoy's shrivelfig as Ron began trying to repair the damage
to the roots he now had to use. Harry skinned the shrivelfig as fast as
he could and flung it back across the table at Malfoy without speaking.
Malfoy was smirking more broadly than ever.
"Seen your pal Hagrid lately?" he asked them quietly.
"None of your business," said Ron jerkily, without looking up.
"I'm afraid he won't be a teacher much longer," said Malfoy in a tone of
mock sorrow. "Father's not very happy about my injury --"
"Keep talking, Malfoy, and I'll give you a real injury," snarled Ron.
"- he's complained to the school governors. And to the Ministry of
Magic. Father's got a lot of influence, you know. And a lasting injury
like this" -- he gave a huge, fake sigh -- "who knows if my arm'll ever
be the same again?"
"So that's why you're putting it on," said Harry, accidentally beheading
a dead caterpillar because his hand was shaking in anger. "To try to get
Hagrid fired."
"Well," said Malfoy, lowering his voice to a whisper, "partly, Potter.
But there are other benefits too. Weasley, slice my caterpillars for
me."
A few cauldrons away, Neville was in trouble. Neville regularly went to
pieces in Potions lessons; it was his worst subject, and his great fear
of Professor Snape made things ten times worse. His potion, which was
supposed to be a bright, acid green, had turned --
"Orange, Longbottom," said Snape, ladling some up and allowing to splash
back into the cauldron, so that everyone could see.
"Orange. Tell me, boy, does anything penetrate that thick skull of
yours? Didn't you hear me say, quite clearly, that only one -tat spleen
was needed? Didn't I state plainly that a dash of leech juice would
suffice? What do I have to do to make you understand, Longbottom?"
Neville was pink and trembling. He looked as though he was on the verge
of tears.
"Please, sir," said Hermione, "please, I could help Neville put it right
--"
"I don't remember asking you to show off, Miss Granger," said Snape
coldly, and Hermione went as pink as Neville. "Longbottom, at the end of
this lesson we will feed a few drops of this potion to your toad and see
what happens. Perhaps that will encourage you to do it properly."
Snape moved away, leaving Neville breathless with fear.
"Help me!" he moaned to Hermione.
"Hey, Harry," said Seamus Finnigan, leaning over to borrow Harry's brass
scales, "have you heard? Daily Prophet this morning -- they reckon
Sirius Black's been sighted."
"Where?" said Harry and Ron quickly. On the other side of the table,
Malfoy looked up, listening closely.
"Not too far from here," said Seamus, who looked excited. "It was a
Muggle who saw him. 'Course, she didn't really understand. The Muggles
think he's just an ordinary criminal, don't they? So she phoned the
telephone hot line. By the time the Ministry of Magic got there, he was
gone."
"Not too far from here... " Ron repeated, looking significantly at
Harry. He turned around and saw Malfoy watching closely. "What, Malfoy?
Need something else skinned?"
But Malfoy's eyes were shining malevolently, and they were fixed Harry.
He leaned across the table.
Black single-handed, Potter?"
"Thinking Of trying to catch
"Yeah, that's right," said Harry offhandedly.
Malfoys thin mouth was curving in a mean smile.
"Of course, if it was me," he said quietly, "I'd have done something
before now. I wouldn't be staying in school like a good boy, I'd be out
there looking for him."
"What are you talking about, Malfoy?" said Ron roughly.
"Don't you know, Potter?" breathed Malfoy, his pate eyes narrowed.
"Know what?"
Malfoy let out a low, sneering laugh.
"Maybe you'd rather not risk your neck," he said. "Want to leave it to
the dementors, do you? But if it was me, I'd want revenge. I'd hunt him
down myself."
"What are you talking about?" said Harry angrily, but at that moment
Snape called, "You should have finished adding your ingredients by now;
this potion needs to stew before it can be drunk, so clear away while it
simmers and then we'll test Longbottom's... "
Crabbe and Goyle laughed openly, watching Neville sweat as he stirred
his potion feverishly. Hermione was muttering instructions to him out of
the corner of her mouth, so that Snape wouldn't see. Harry and Ron
packed away their unused ingredients and went to wash their hands and
ladles in the stone basin in the corner.
"What did Malfoy mean?" Harry muttered to Ron as he stuck his hands
under the icy jet that poured from the gargoyle's mouth "Why would I
want revenge on Black? He hasn't done anything to me -- yet.
"He's making it up," said Ron savagely. "He's trying to make you do
something stupid...."
The end of the lesson in sight, Snape strode over to Neville, who was
cowering by his cauldron.
"Everyone gather 'round," said Snape, his black eyes glittering, and
watch what happens to Longbottom's toad. If he has managed to produce a
Shrinking Solution, it will shrink to a tadpole. If, as I don't doubt,
he has done it wrong, his toad is likely to be poisoned."
The Gryffindors watched fearfully. The Slytherins looked excited. Snape
picked up Trevor the toad in his left hand and dipped a small spoon into
Neville's potion, which was now green. He trickled a few drops down
Trevor's throat.
There was a moment of hushed silence, in which Trevor gulped; then there
was a small pop, and Trevor the tadpole was wriggling in Snape's palm.
The Gryffindors burst into applause. Snape, looking sour, pulled a small
bottle from the pocket of his robe, poured a few drops on top of Trevor,
and he reappeared suddenly, fully grown.
"Five points from Gryffindor," said Snape, which wiped the smiles from
every face. "I told you not to help him, Miss Granger. Class dismissed."
Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the steps to the entrance hall. Harry
was still thinking about what Malfoy had said, while Ron was seething
about Snape.
"Five points from Gryffindor because the potion was all right!
Why didn't You lie, Hermione? You should've said Neville did it all by
himself!"
Hermione didn't answer. Ron looked around.
"Where is she?"
Harry turned too. They were at the top of the steps now, watching the
rest of the class pass them, heading for the Great Hall and lunch.
"She was right behind us," said Ron, frowning.
Malfoy passed them, walking between Crabbe and Goyle. He smirked at
Harry and disappeared.
"There she is," said Harry.
Hermione was panting slightly, hurrying up the stairs; one hand clutched
her bag, the other seemed to be tucking something down the front of her
robes.
"How did you do that?" said Ron.
"What?" said Hermione, joining them.
"One minute you were right behind us, the next moment, you were back at
the bottom of the stairs again."
"What?" Hermione looked slightly confused. "Oh -- I had to go back for
something. Oh no --"
A seam had split on Hermione's bag. Harry wasn't surprised; he could see
that it was crammed with at least a dozen large and heavy books.
"Why are you carrying all these around with you?" Ron asked her.
"You know how many subjects I'm taking," said Hermione breathlessly.
"Couldn't hold these for me, could you?"
"But --" Ron was turning over the books she had handed him, looking at
the covers. "You havent got any of these subjects today. It's only
Defense Against the Dark Arts this afternoon."
"Oh yes," said Hermione vaguely, but she packed all the books back into
her bag just the same. I hope there's something good for lunch, I'm
starving," she added, and she marched off toward the Great Hall.
"D'you get the feeling Hermione's not telling us something?Ron asked
Harry.
Professor Lupin wasn't there when they arrived at his first Defense
Against the Dark Arts lesson. They all sat down, took out their books,
quills, and parchment, and were talking when he finally entered the
room. Lupin smiled vaguely and placed his tatty old briefcase on the
teacher's desk. He was as shabby as ever but looked healthier than he
had on the train, as though he had had a few square meals.
"Good afternoon," he said. "Would you please put all your books back in
your bags. Today's will be a practical lesson. You will need only your
wands."
A few curious looks were exchanged as the class put away their books.
They had never had a practical Defense Against the Dark Arts before,
unless you counted the memorable class last year when their old teacher
had brought a cageful of pixies -to class and set them loose.
"Right then," said Professor Lupin, when everyone was ready. "If you'd
follow me."
Puzzled but interested, the class got to its feet and followed Professor
Lupin out of the classroom. He led them along the deserted corridor and
around a corner, where the first thing they saw was Peeves the
Poltergeist, who was floating upside down in midair and stuffing the
nearest keyhole with chewing gum.
Peeves didn't look up until Professor Lupin was two feet away; ,hen he
wiggled his curly-toed feet and broke into song.
"Loony, loopy Lupin," Peeves sang. "Loony, loopy Lupin, loony, loopy
Lupin --"
Rude and unmanageable as he almost always was, Peeves usually showed
some respect toward the teachers. Everyone looked quickly at Professor
Lupin to see how he would take this; to their surprise, he was still
smiling.
"I'd take that gum out of the keyhole if I were you, Peeves," he said
pleasantly. "Mr. Filch won't be able to get in to his brooms."
Filch was the Hogwarts caretaker, a bad-tempered, failed wizard who
waged a constant war against the students and, indeed, Peeves. However,
Peeves paid no attention to Professor Lupin's words, except to blow a
loud wet raspberry.
Professor Lupin gave a small sigh and took out his wand.
"This is a useful little spell, he told the class over his shoulder.
"Please watch closely."
He raised the wand to shoulder height, said, "Waddiwasi! "and pointed it
at Peeves.
With the force of a bullet, the wad of chewing gum shot out of the
keyhole and straight down Peeves's left nostril; he whirled upright and
zoomed away, cursing.
"Cool, sit!" said Dean Thomas in amazement.
"Thank you, Dean," said Professor Lupin, putting his wand away again.
"Shall we proceed?"
They set off again, the class looking at shabby Professor Lupin with
increased respect. He led them down a second corridor and stopped, right
outside the staffroom door.
"Inside, please," said Professor Lupin, opening it and standing back.
The staffroom, a long, paneled room full of old, mismatched chairs, was
empty except for one teacher. Professor Snape was sitting in a low
armchair, and he looked around as the class filed in. His eyes were
glittering and there was a nasty sneer playing around his mouth. As
Professor Lupin came in and made to close the door behind him, Snape
said, "Leave it open, Lupin. I'd rather not witness this."
He got to his feet and strode past the class, his black robes billowing
behind him. At the doorway he turned on his heel and said, "Possibly no
one's warned you, Lupin, but this class contains Neville Longbottom. I
would advise you not to entrust him with anything difficult. Not unless
Miss Granger is hissing instructions in his ear."
Neville went scarlet. Harry glared at Snape; it was bad enough that he
bullied Neville in his own classes, let alone doing it in front of other
teachers.
Professor Lupin had raised his eyebrows.
"I was hoping that Neville would assist me with the first stage of the
operation," he said, "and I am sure he will perform it admirably."
Neville's face went, if possible, even redder. Snape's lip curled, but
he left, shutting the door with a snap.
"Now, then," said Professor Lupin, beckoning the class toward the end of
the room, where there was nothing but an old wardrobe where the teachers
kept their spare robes. As Professor Lupin went to stand next to it, the
wardrobe gave a sudden wobble, banging off the wall.
"Nothing to worry about," said Professor Lupin calmly because a few
people had jumped backward in alarm. "There's a boggart in there."
Most people seemed to feel that this was something to worry about.
Neville gave Professor Lupin a look of pure terror, and Seamus Finnigan
eyed the now rattling doorknob apprehensively.
"Boggarts like dark, enclosed spaces," said Professor Lupin. "Wardrobes,
the gap beneath beds, the cupboards under sinks -- I've even met one
that had lodged itself in a grandfather clock. This one moved in
yesterday afternoon, and I asked the headmaster if the staff would leave
it to give my third years some practice.
"So, the first question we must ask ourselves is, what is a boggart?"
Hermione put up her hand.
"It's a shape-shifter," she said. "It can take the shape of whatever it
thinks will frighten us most."
"Couldn't have put it better myself," said Professor Lupin, and Hermione
glowed. "So the boggart sitting in the darkness within has not yet
assumed a form. He does not yet know what will frighten the person on
the other side of the door. Nobody knows what a boggart looks like when
he is alone, but when I let him out, he will immediately become whatever
each of us most fears.
"This means," said Professor Lupin, choosing to ignore Neville's 'mall
sputter of terror, "that we have a huge advantage over the boggart
before we begin. Have you spotted it, Harry?"
Trying to answer a question with Hermione next to him, bobbing up and
down on the balls of her feet with her hand in the air, was very
off-putting, but Harry had a go.
"Er -- because there are so many of us, it won't know what shape it
should be?"
"Precisely," said Professor Lupin, and Hermione put her hand down,
looking a little disappointed. "It's always best to have com pany when
you're dealing with a boggart. He becomes confused. Which should he
become, a headless corpse or a flesh-eating slug? I once saw a boggart
make that very mistake -- tried to frighten two people at once and
turned himself into half a slug. Not remotely frightening.
"The charm that repels a boggart is simple, yet it requires force of
mind. You see, the thing that really finishes a boggart is laughter.
What you need to do is force it to assume a shape that you find amusing.
"We will practice the charm without wands first. After me, please ...
Riddikulus!"
"Riddikulus!" said the class together.
"Good," said Professor Lupin. "Very good. But that was the easy part,
I'm afraid. You see, the word alone is not enough. And this is where you
come in, Neville."
The wardrobe shook again, though not as much as Neville, who walked
forward as though he were heading for the gallows.
"Right, Neville," said Professor Lupin. "First things first: what would
you say is the thing that frightens you most in the world?"
Neville's lips moved, but no noise came out.
"didn't catch that, Neville, sorry," said Professor Lupin cheerfully.
Neville looked around rather wildly, as though begging someone to help
him, then said, in barely more than a whisper, "Professor Snape."
Nearly everyone laughed. Even Neville grinned apologetically. Professor
Lupin, however, looked thoughtful.
"Professor Snape... hmmm... Neville, I believe you live with your
grandmother?"
"Er -- yes," said Neville nervously. "But -- I don't want the boggart to
turn into her either."
"No, no, you misunderstand me," said Professor Lupin, now smiling. "I
wonder, could you tell us what sort of clothes your grandmother usually
wears?"
Neville looked startled, but said, "Well... always the same hat. A tall
one with a stuffed vulture on top. And a long dress... green,
normally... and sometimes a fox-fur scarf."
"And a handbag?" prompted Professor Lupin.
"A big red one," said Neville.
"Right then," said Professor Lupin. "Can you picture those clothes very
clearly, Neville? Can you see them in your mind's eye?"
"Yes," said Neville uncertainty, plainly wondering what was coming next.
"When the boggart bursts out of this wardrobe, Neville, and sees You, it
will assume the form of Professor Snape," said Lupin. "And You will
raise your wand -- thus -- and cry 'Riddikulus' -- and concentrate hard
on your grandmother's clothes. If all goes well, Professor Boggart Snape
will be forced into that vulture-topped hat, and that green dress, with
that big red handbag."
There was a great shout of laughter. The wardrobe wobbled more
violently.
"If Neville is successful, the boggart is likely to shift his attention
to each of us in turn," said Professor Lupin. "I would like all of you
to take a moment now to think of the thing that scares you most, and
imagine how you might force it to look comical...."
The room went quiet. Harry thought... 'What scared him most in the
world?
His first thought was Lord Voldemort -- a Voldemort returned to full
strength. But before he had even started to plan a possible
counterattack on a boggart-Voldemort, a horrible image came floating to
the surface of his mind....
A rotting, glistening hand, slithering back beneath a black cloak ... a
long, rattling breath from an unseen mouth... then a cold so penetrating
it felt like drowning....
Harry shivered, then looked around, hoping no one had noticed. Many
people had their eyes shut tight. Ron was muttering to himself, "Take
its legs off " Harry was sure he knew what that was about. Ron's
greatest fear was spiders.
"Everyone ready?" said Professor Lupin.
Harry felt a lurch of fear. He wasn't ready. How could you make a
dementor less frightening? But he didn't want to ask for more time;
everyone else was nodding and rolling up their sleeves.
"Neville, we're going to back away," said Professor Lupin. "Let you have
a clear field, all right? I'll call the next person forward.... Everyone
back, now, so Neville can get a clear shot --"
They all retreated, backed against the walls, leaving Neville alone
beside the wardrobe. He looked pale and frightened, but he had pushed up
the sleeves of his robes and was holding his wand ready.
"On the count of three, Neville," said Professor Lupin, who was
pointing his own wand at the handle of the wardrobe. "One two -- three
-- now!"
A jet of sparks shot from the end of Professor Lupin's wand and hit the
doorknob. The wardrobe burst open. Hook-nosed and menacing, Professor
Snape stepped out, his eyes flashing at Neville.
Neville backed away, his wand up, mouthing wordlessly. Snape was bearing
down upon him, reaching inside his robes.
"R -- r -- riddikulus! "squeaked Neville.
There was a noise like a whip crack. Snape stumbled; he was wearing a
long, lace-trimmed dress and a towering hat topped with a moth-eaten
vulture, and he was swinging a huge crimson handbag.
There was a roar of laughter; the boggart paused, confused, and
Professor Lupin shouted, "Parvati! Forward!"
Parvati walked forward, her face set. Snape rounded on her. There was
another crack, and where he had stood was a bloodstained, bandaged
mummy; its sightless face was turned to Parvati and it began to walk
toward her very slowly, dragging its feet, its stiff arms rising --
"Riddikulus!" cried Parvati.
A bandage unraveled at the mummy's feet; it became entangled, fell face
forward, and its head rolled off.
"Seamus!" roared Professor Lupin.
Seamus darted past Parvati.
Crack! Where the mummy had been was a woman with floorlength black hair
and a skeletal, green-tinged face -- a banshee. She opened her mouth
wide and an unearthly sound filled the room, a long, wailing shriek that
made the hair on Harry's head stand on end -- 'Riddikulus!" shouted
Seamus.
The banshee made a rasping noise and clutched her throat; her voice was
gone.
Crack! The banshee turned into a rat, which chased its tail in a circle,
then -- crack!- became a rattlesnake, which slithered and writhed before
-- crack! -- becoming a single, bloody eyeball.
'It's confused!" shouted Lupin. "We're getting there! Dean!"
Dean hurried forward.
Crack! The eyeball became a severed hand, which flipped over and began
to creep along the floor like a crab.
"Riddikulus!" yelled Dean.
'There was a snap, and the hand was trapped in a mousetrap.
"Excellent! Ron, you next!"
Ron leapt forward.
Crack!
Quite a few people screamed. A giant spider, six feet tall and covered
in hair, was advancing on Ron, clicking its pincers menacingly. For a
moment, Harry thought Ron had frozen. Then --
"Riddikulus!" bellowed Ron, and the spider's legs vanished; it rolled
over and over; Lavender Brown squealed and ran out of its way and it
came to a halt at Harry's feet. He raised his wand, ready, but --
"Here!" shouted Professor Lupin suddenly, hurrying forward. Crack!
The legless spider had vanished. For a second, everyone looked wildly
around to see where it was. Then they saw a silvery-white orb hanging in
the air in front of Lupin, who said, "Riddikulus!" almosi lazily.
Crack!
"Forward, Neville, and finish him off!" said Lupin as the boggart landed
on the floor as a cockroach. Crack! Snape was back. This time Neville
charged forward looking determined.
"Riddikulus!" he shouted, and they had a split second's view of Snape in
his lacy dress before Neville let out a great "Ha!" of laughter, and the
boggart exploded, burst into a thousand tiny wisps of smoke, and was
gone.
"Excellent!" cried Professor Lupin as the class broke into applause.
"Excellent) Neville. Well done, everyone.... Let me See... five points
to Gryffindor for every person to tackle the boggart -- ten for Neville
because he did it twice... and five each to Hermione and Harry."
"But I didn't do anything," said Harry.
"You and Hermione answered my questions correctly at the start of the
class, Harry," Lupin said lightly. "Very well, everyone, an excellent
lesson. Homework, kindly read the chapter on boggarts and summarize it
for me... to be handed in on Monday. That will be all."
Talking excitedly, the class left the staffroom. Harry, however, wasn't
feeling cheerful. Professor Lupin had deliberately stopped him from
tackling the boggart. Why? Was it because he'd seen Harry collapse on
the train, and thought he wasn't up to much? Had he thought Harry would
pass out again?
But no one else seemed to have noticed anything.
"Did you see me take that banshee?" shouted Seamus. "And the hand!" said
Dean, waving his own around.
"And Snape in that hat!" "And my mummy!"
I wonder why Professor Lupin's frightened of crystal balls?" said
Lavender thoughtfully.
"That was the best Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson we've ever had,
wasn't it?" said Ron excitedly as they made their way back to the
classroom to get their bags.
"He seems like a very good teacher," said Hermione approvingly. "But I
wish I could have had a turn with the boggart --"
"What would it have been for you?" said Ron, sniggering. "A piece of
homework that only got nine out of ten?"
FLIGHT OF THE FAT FADY
In no time at all, Defense Against the Dark Arts had become most
people's favorite class. Only Draco Malfoy and his gang of Slytherins
had anything bad to say about Professor Lupin.
"Look at the state of his robes," Malfoy would say in a loud whisper as
Professor Lupin passed. "He dresses like our old houseelf "
But no one else cared that Professor Lupin's robes were patched and
frayed. His next few lessons were just as interesting as the first.
After boggarts, they studied Red Caps, nasty little goblin like
creatures that lurked wherever there had been bloodshed: in the dungeons
of castles and the potholes of deserted battlefields, waiting to
bludgeon those who had gotten lost. From Red Caps they moved on to
kappas, creepy. water-dwellers that looked like scaly monkeys, with
webbed hands itching to strangle unwitting waders in their ponds.
Harry only wished he was as happy with some of his other classes. Worst
of all was Potions. Snape was in a particularly vindictive mood these
days, and no one was in any doubt why. The story of the boggart assuming
Snape's shape, and the way that Neville had dressed it in his
grandmother's clothes, had traveled through the school like wildfire.
Snape didn't seem to find it funny. His eyes flashed menacingly at the
very mention of Professor Lupin's name, and he was bullying Neville
worse than ever.
Harry was also growing to dread the hours he spent in Professor
Trelawney's stifling tower room, deciphering lopsided shapes and
symbols, trying to ignore the way Professor Trelawney's enormous eyes
filled with tears every time she looked at him. He couldn't like
Professer Trelawney, even though she was treated with respect bordering
on reverence by many of the class. Parvati Patil and Lavender Brown had
taken to haunting Professor Trelawney's tower room at lunch times, and
always returned with annoyingly superior looks on their faces, as though
they knew things the others didn't. They had also started using hushed
voices whenever they spoke to Harry, as though he were on his deathbed.
Nobody really liked Care of Magical Creatures, which, after the
action-packed first class, had become extremely dull. Hagrid seemed to
have lost his confidence. They were now spending lesson after lesson
learning how to look after flobberworms, which had to be some of the
most boring creatures in existence.
"Why would anyone bother looking after them?" said Ron, after yet
another hour of poking shredded lettuce down the flobberworms' throats.
At the start of October, however, Harry had something else to occupy
him, something so enjoyable it more than made up for his unsatisfactory
classes. The Quidditch season was approaching, and O1iver Wood, Captain
of the Gryffindor team, called a meeting on Thursday evening to discuss
tactics for the new season.
There were seven people on a Quidditch team: three Chasers, whose job it
was to score goals by putting the Quaffle (a red, soccer-sized ball)
through one of the fifty-foot-high hoops at each
end of the field; two Beaters, who were equipped with heavy bats to
repel the Bludgers (two heavy black balls that zoomed around trying to
attack the players); a Keeper, who defended the goal
posts, and the Seeker, who had the hardest job of all, that of catching
the Golden Snitch, a tiny, winged, walnut-sized ball, whose capture
ended the game and earned the Seeker's team an extra one hundred and
fifty points.
Oliver Wood was a burly seventeen-year-old, now in his seventh and final
year at Hogwarts. There was a quiet sort of desperation in his voice a's
he addressed his six fellow team members in the chilly locker rooms on
the edge of the darkening Quidditch field.
"This is our last chance -- my last chance -- to win the Quidditch Cup,"
he told them, striding up and down in front of them. "I'll be leaving at
the end of this year. I'll never get another shot at it."
"Gryffindor hasn't won for seven years now. Okay, so we've had the worst
luck in the world -- injuries -- then the tournamentgetting called off
last year Wood swallowed, as though the memory still brought a lump to
his throat. "But we also know we've got the
best-ruddy-team-in-the-school," he said, punching a fist into his other
hand, the old manic glint back in his eye. "We've got three superb
Chasers."
Wood pointed at Alicia Spinner, Angelina Johnson, and Katie Bell.
"We've got two unbeatable Beaters."
"Stop it, Oliver, you're embarrassing us," said Fred and George Weasley
together, pretending to blush.
"And we've got a Seeker who has never failed to win us a match!" Wood
rumbled, glaring at Harry with a kind of furious pride. "And me," he
added as an afterthought.
"We think you're very good too, Oliver," said George.
"Spanking good Keeper," said Fred.
"The point is," Wood went on, resuming his pacing, "the Quidditch Cup
should have had our name on it these last two years. Ever since Harry
joined the team, I've thought the thing was in the bag. But we haven't
got it, and this year's the last chance we'll get to finally see our
name on the thing...."
Wood spoke so dejectedly that even Fred and George looked sympathetic.
"Oliver, this year's our year," said Fred.
"We'll do it, Oliver!" said Angelina.
"Definitely," said Harry.
Full of determination, the team started training sessions, three
evenings a week. The weather was getting colder and wetter, the nights
darker, but no amount of mud, wind, or rain could tarnish Harry's
wonderful vision of finally winning the huge, silver Quidditch Cup.
Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room one evening after training,
cold and stiff but pleased with the way practice had gone, to find the
room buzzing excitedly.
"What's happened?", he asked Ron and Hermione, who were sitting in two
of the best chairs by the fireside and completing some star charts for
Astronomy.
"First Hogsmeade weekend," said Ron, pointing at a notice that had
appeared on the battered old bulletin board. "End of October.
Halloween."
"Excellent," said Fred, who had followed Harry through the portrait
hole. "I need to visit Zonko's. I'm nearly out of Stink Pellets."
Harry threw himself into a chair beside Ron, his high spirits ebbing
away. Hermione seemed to read his mind.
"Harry, I'm sure you'll be able to go next time," she said. "They're
bound to catch Black soon. He's been sighted once already."
"Black's not fool enough to try anything in Hogsmeade," said Ron. "Ask
McGonagall if you can go this time, Harry. The next one might not be for
ages --"
"Ron!" said Hermione. "Harry's supposed to stay in school-"
"He can't be the only third year left behind," said Ron. "Ask
McGonagall, go on, Harry --"
"Yeah, I think I will," said Harry, making up his mind.
Hermione opened her mouth to argue, but at that moment Crookshanks leapt
lightly onto her lap. A large, dead spider was dangling from his mouth.
"Does he have to eat that in front of us?" said Ron, scowling.
"Clever Crookshanks, did you catch that all by yourself?" said Hermione.
Crookshanks; slowly chewed up the spider, his yellow eyes fixed
insolently on Ron.
"Just keep him over there, that's all," said Ron irritably, turning back
to his star chart. "1've got Scabbers asleep in my bag."
Harry yawned. He really wanted to go to bed, but he still had his own
star chart to complete. He pulled his bag toward him, took out
parchment, ink, and quill, and started work.
"You can copy mine, if you like," said Ron, labeling his last star with
a flourish and shoving the chart toward Harry.
Hermione, who disapproved of copying, pursed her lips but didn't say
anything. Crookshanks was still staring unblinkingly at Ron, flicking
the end of his bushy tail. Then, without warning, he pounced.
"OY!" Ron roared, seizing his bag as Crookshanks sank four sets of claws
deep inside it and began tearing ferociously. "GET OFF, YOU STUPID
ANIMAL!"
Ron tried to pull the bag away from Crookshanks, but Crookshanks clung
on, spitting and slashing.
"Ron, don't hurt him!" squealed Hermione; the whole common room was
watching; Ron whirled the bag around, Crookshanks still clinging to it,
and Scabbers came flying out of the top -
"CATCH THAT CAR' Ron yelled as Crookshanks freed himself from the
remnants of the bag, sprang over the table, and chased after the
terrified Scabbers.
George Weasley made a lunge for Crookshanks but missed; Scabbers
streaked through twenty pairs of legs and shot beneath an old chest of
drawers. Crookshanks skidded to a halt, crouched low on his bandy legs,
and started making furious swipes beneath it with his front paw.
Ron and Hermione hurried over; Hermione grabbed Crookshanks around the
middle and heaved him away; Ron threw himself onto his stomach and, with
great difficulty, pulled Scabbers out by the tail.
"Look at him!" he said furiously to Hermione, dangling Scabbers in front
of her. "He's skin and bone! You keep that cat away from him!"
"Crookshanks doesn't understand it's wrong!" said Hermione, her voice
shaking. "All cats chase rats, Ron!"
"There's something funny about that animal!" said Ron, who was trying to
persuade a frantically wiggling Scabbers back into his pocket. "It heard
me say that Scabbers was in my bag!"
"Oh, what rubbish," said Hermione impatiently. "Crookshanks could smell
him, Ron, how else d'you think --"
"That cat's got it in for Scabbers!" said Ron, 'ignoring the people
around him, who were starting to giggle. "And Scabbers was here first,
and he's ill!"
Ron marched through the common room and out of sight up the stairs to
the boys' dormitories.
Ron was still in a bad mood with Hermione next day. He barely talked to
her all through Herbology, even though he, Harry, and Hermione were
working together on the same puffapod.
"How's Scabbers?" Hermione asked timidly as they stripped fat pink pods
from the plants and emptied the shining beans into a wooden pail.
"He's hiding at the bottom of my bed, shaking, " said Ron angrily,
missing the pail and scattering beans over the greenhouse floor.
"Careful, Weasley, careful!" cried Professor Sprout as the beans burst
into bloom before their very eyes.
They had Transfiguration next. Harry, who had resolved to ask Professor
McGonagall after the lesson whether he could go into Hogsmeade with the
rest, joined the line outside the class trying to decide how he was
going to argue his case. He was distracted, however, by a disturbance at
the front of the line.
Lavender Brown seemed to be crying. Parvati had her arm around her and
was explaining something to Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who were
looking very serious.
"What's the matter, Lavender?" said Hermione anxiously as she, Harry,
and Ron went to join the group.
"She got a letter from home this morning," Parvati whispered. "It's her
rabbit, Binky. He's been killed by a fox."
"Oh," said Hermione, "I'm sorry, Lavender."
"I should have known!" said Lavender tragically. "You know what day it
is?"
"Er --"
"The sixteenth of October! 'That thing you're dreading, it will happen
on the sixteenth of October!' Remember? She was right, she was right!"
The whole class was gathered around Lavender now. Seamus shook his head
seriously. Hermione hesitated; then she said, "You -- you were dreading
Binky being killed by a fox?"
"Well, not necessarily by a fox," said Lavender, looking up at Hermione
with streaming eyes, "but I was obviously dreading him dying, wasn't l?"
"Oh," said Hermione. She paused again. Then
"Was Binky an old rabbit?"
"N -- no!" sobbed Lavender. "H -- he was only a baby!"
Parvati tightened her arm around Lavender's shoulders.
"But then, why would you dread him dying?" said Hermione.
Parvati glared at her.
"Well, look at it logically," said Hermione, turning to the rest of the
group- "I mean, Binky didn't even die today, did he? Lavender just got
the news today-" Lavender wailed loudly. "- and she can't have been
dreading it, because it's come as a real shock --"
"Don't mind Hermione, Lavender," said Ron loudly, "she doesn't think
other people's pets matter very much."
Professor McGonagall opened the classroom door at that moment, which was
perhaps lucky; Hermione and Ron were looking daggers at each other, and
when they got into class, they seated themselves on either side of Harry
and didn't talk to each other for the whole class.
Harry still hadn't decided what he was going to say to Professor
McGonagall when the bell rang at the end of the lesson, but it was she
who brought up the subject of Hogsmeade first.
"One moment, please !" she called as the class made to leave. "As you're
all in my House, you should hand Hogsmeade permission forms to me before
Halloween. No form, no visiting the village, so don't forget!"
Neville put up his hand.
"Please, Professor, I -- I think I've lost
"Your grandmother sent yours to me directly, Longbottom," said Professor
McGonagall. "She seemed to think it was safer. Well, that's all, you may
leave."
"Ask her now," Ron hissed at Harry.
"Oh. but --" Hermione began.
"Go for it, Harry," said Ron stubbornly.
Harry waited for the rest of the class to disappear, then headed
nervously for Professor McGonagall's desk.
"Yes, Potter?" Harry took a deep breath.
"Professor, my aunt and uncle -- er -- forgot to sign my form," he said.
Professor McGonagall looked over her square spectacles at him but didn't
say anything.
"So -- er d'you think it would be all right mean, will It be okay if I
-- if I go to Hogsmeade?"
Professor McGonagall looked down and began shuffling papers on her desk.
"I'm afraid not, Potter," she said. "You heard what I said. No form, no
visiting the village. That's the rule."
"But -- Professor, my aunt and uncle -- you know, they're Muggles, they
don't really understand about -- about Hogwarts forms and stuff," Harry
said, while Ron egged him on with vigorous nods. "If you said I could go
--"
"But I don't say so," said Professor McGonagall, standing up and piling
her papers neatly into a drawer. "The form clearly states that the
parent or guardian must give permission." She turned to look at him,
with an odd expression on her face. Was it pity? "I'm sorry, Potter, but
that's my final word. You had better hurry, or you'll be late for your
next lesson."
There was nothing to be done. Ron called Professor McGonagall a lot of
names that greatly annoyed Hermione; Hermione assumed an
"all-for-the-best" expression that made Ron even angrier, and Harry had
to endure everyone in the class talking loudly and happily about what
they were going to do first, once they got into Hogsmeade.
"There's always the feast," said Ron, in an effort to cheer Harry UP.
"You know, the Halloween feast, in the evening."
"Yeah," said Harry gloomily, "great."
The Halloween feast was always good, but it would taste a lot better if
he was coming to it after a day in Hogsmeade with everyone else. Nothing
anyone said made him feel any better about being left behind. Dean
Thomas, who was good with a quill, had offered to forge Uncle Vernon's
signature on the form, but as Harry had already told Professor
McGonagall he hadn't had it signed, that was no good. Ron halfheartedly
suggested the Invisibility Cloak, but Hermione stamped on that one,
reminding Ron what Dumbledore had told them about the dementors being
able to see through them. Percy had what were possibly the least helpful
words of comfort.
"They make a fuss about Hogsmeade, but I assure you, Harry, it's not all
it's cracked up to be," he said seriously. "All right, the sweetshop's
rather good, and Zonko's Joke Shop's frankly dangerous, and yes, the
Shrieking Shack's always worth a visit, but really, Harry, apart from
that, you're not missing anything."
On Halloween morning, Harry awoke with the rest and went down to
breakfast, feeling thoroughly depressed, though doing his best to act
normally.
"We'll bring you. lots of sweets back from Honeydukes," said Hermione,
looking desperately sorry for him.
"Yeah, loads," said Ron. He and Hermione had finally forgotten their
squabble about Crookshanks in the face of Harry's difficulties.
"Don't worry about me," said Harry, in what he hoped was at, offhand
voice, "I'll see you at the feast. Have a good time."
He accompanied them to the entrance hall, where Filch, the caretaker,
was standing inside the front doors, checking off names against a long
list, peering suspiciously into every face, and making sure that no one
was sneaking out who shouldn't be going.
"Staying here, Potter?" shouted Malfoy, who was standing in line with
Crabbe and Goyle. "Scared of passing the dementors?"
Harry ignored him and made his solitary way up the marble staircase,
through the deserted corridors, and back to Gryffindor Tower.
"Password?" said the Fat Lady, jerking out of a doze.
"Fortuna Major," said Harry listlessly.
The portrait swung open and he climbed through the hole into the common
room. It was full of chattering first and second years, and a few older
students, who had obviously visited Hogsmeade so often the novelty had
worn off
"Harry! Harry! Hi, Harry!"
It was Colin Creevey, a second year who was deeply in awe of Harry and
never missed an opportunity to speak to him.
"Aren't you going to Hogsmeade, Harry? Why not? Hey" -- Colin looked
eagerly around at his friends -- "you can come and sit with us, if you
like, Harry!"
"Er -- no, thanks, Colin," said Harry, who wasn't in the mood to have a
lot of people staring avidly at the scar on his forehead. "I -- I've got
to go to the library, got to get some work done."
After that, he had no choice but to turn right around and head back out
of the portrait hole again.
"What was the point waking me up?" the Fat Lady called grumpily after
him as he walked away.
Harry wandered dispiritedly toward the library, but halfway there he
changed his mind; he didn't feel like working. He turned around and came
face-to-face with Filch, who had obviously just seen off the last of the
Hogsmeade visitors.
"What are you doing?" Filch snarled suspiciously.
"Nothing," said Harry truthfully.
"Nothing!" spat Filch, his jowls quivering unpleasantly. "A likely
story! Sneaking around on your own -- why aren't you in Hogsmeade buying
Stink Pellets and Belch Powder and Whizzing Worms like the rest of your
nasty little friends?"
Harry shrugged.
"Well, get back to your common room where you belong!" snapped Filch,
and he stood glaring until Harry had passed out of sight.
But Harry didn't go back to the common room; he climbed a staircase,
thinking vaguely of visiting the Owlery to see Hedwig, and was walking
along another corridor when a voice from inside one of the rooms said,
"Harry?"
Harry doubled back to see who had spoken and met Professor Lupin,
looking around his office door.
"What are you doing?" said Lupin, though in a very different voice from
Filch. "Where are Ron and Hermione?"
"Hogsmeade," said Harry, in a would-be casual voice.
"Ah," said Lupin. He considered Harry for a moment. "Why don't you come
in? I've just taken delivery of a grindylow for our next lesson." "A
what?" said Harry. I
He followed Lupin into his office. In the corner stood a very large tank
of water. A sickly green creature with sharp little horns had its face
pressed against the glass, pulling faces and flexing its long, spindly
fingers.
"Water demon," said Lupin, surveying the grindylow thoughtfully. "We
shouldn't have much difficulty with him, not after the kappas. The trick
is to break his grip. You notice the abnormally long fingers? Strong,
but very brittle."
The grindylow bared its green teeth and then buried itself in a tangle
of weeds in a corner.
"Cup of tea?" Lupin said, looking around for his kettle. "I was just
thinking of making one."
"All right," said Harry awkwardly.
Lupin tapped the kettle with his wand and a blast of steam issued
suddenly from the spout.
"Sit down," said Lupin, taking the lid off a dusty tin. "I've only got
teabags, I'm afraid -- but I daresay you've had enough of tea leaves?"
Harry looked at him. Lupin's eyes were twinkling.
"How did you know about that?" Harry asked.
"Professor McGonagall told me," said Lupin, passing Harry a chipped mug
of tea. "You're not worried, are you?"
"No," said Harry.
He thought for a moment of telling Lupin about the dog he'd seen in
Magnolia Crescent but decided not to. He didn't want Lupin to think he
was a coward, especially since Lupin alreadv seemed to think he couldn't
cope with a boggart.
Something of Harry's thoughts seemed to have shown on his face, because
Lupin said, "Anything worrying you, Harry?"
"No," Harry lied. He drank a bit of tea and watched the grindylow
brandishing a fist at him. "Yes," he said suddenly, putting his tea down
on Lupin's desk. "You know that day we fought the boggart?"
"Yes," said Lupin slowly.
"Why didn't you let me fight it?" said Harry abruptly.
Lupin raised his eyebrows.
"I would have thought that was obvious, Harry," he said, sounding
surprised.
Harry, who had expected Lupin to deny that he'd done any such thing, was
taken aback.
"Why?" he said again.
"Well," said Lupin, frowning slightly, "I assumed that if the boggart
faced you, it would assume the shape of Lord Voldemort."
Harry stared. Not only was this the last answer he'd expected, but Lupin
had said Voldemort's name. The only person Harry had ever heard say the
name aloud (apart from himself) was Professor Dumbledore.
"Clearly, I was wrong," said Lupin, still frowning at Harry. "But I
didn't think it a good idea for Lord Voldemort to materialize in the
staffroom. I imagined that people would panic."
"I didn't think of Voldemort," said Harry honestly. "I -- I remembered
those dementors."
"I see," said Lupin thoughtfully. "Well, well... I'm impressed." fie
smiled slightly at the look of surprise on Harry's face. "That suggests
that what you fear most of all is -- fear. Very wise, Harry."
Harry didn't know what to say to that, so he drank some mot,, tea.
"So you've been thinking that I didn't believe you capable of fighting
the boggart?" said Lupin shrewdly.
"Well... yeah," said Harry. He was suddenly feeling a lot happier.
"Professor Lupin, you know the dementors --"
He was interrupted by a knock on the door.
"Come in," called Lupin.
The door opened, and in came Snape. He was carrying a goblet, which was
smoking faintly, and stopped at the sight of Harry, his black eyes
narrowing.
"Ah, Severus," said Lupin, smiling. "Thanks very much. Could you leave
it here on the desk for me?"
Snape set down the smoking goblet, his eyes wandering between Harry and
Lupin.
"I was just showing Harry my grindylow," said Lupin pleasantly, pointing
at the tank.
"Fascinating," said Snape, without looking at it. "You should drink that
directly, Lupin."
"Yes, Yes, I will," said Lupin.
"I made an entire cauldronful," Snape continued. "If you need more.
"I should probably take some again tomorrow. Thanks very much, Severus."
"Not at all," said Snape, but there was a look in his eye Harry didn't
like. He backed out of the room, unsmiling and watchful.
Harry looked curiously at the goblet. Lupin smiled.
"Professor Snape has very kindly concocted a potion for me," he said. "I
have never been much of a potion-brewer and this one is particularly
complex." He picked up the goblet and sniffed it. "Pity sugar makes it
useless," he added, taking a sip and shuddering.
"Why --?" Harry began. Lupin looked at him and answered the unfinished
question.
"I've been feeling a bit off-color," he said. "This potion is the only
thing that helps. I am very lucky to be working alongside Professor
Snape; there aren't many wizards who are up to making it."
Professor Lupin took another sip and Harry had a crazy urge to knock the
goblet out of his hands.
"Professor Snape's very interested in the Dark Arts, he blurted out.
"Really?" said Lupin, looking only mildly interested as he took another
gulp of potion.
"Some people reckon --" Harry hesitated, then plunged recklessly on,
"some people reckon he'd do anything to get the Defense Against the Dark
Arts job."
Lupin drained the goblet and pulled a face.
"Disgusting," he said. "Well, Harry, I'd better get back to work. see
you at the feast later."
"Right," said Harry, putting down his empty teacup.
The empty goblet was still smoking.
"There you go," said Ron. "We got as much as we could carry."
A shower of brilliantly colored sweets fell into Harry's lap. It was
dusk, and Ron and Hermione had just turned up in the common room,
pink-faced from the cold wind and looking as though they'd had the time
of their lives.
"Thanks," said Harry, picking up a packet of tiny black Pepper Imps.
"What's Hogsmeade like? Where did you go?"
By the sound of it -- everywhere. Dervish and Banges, the wizarding
equipment shop, Zonko's Joke Shop, into the Three Broomsticks for
foaming mugs of hot butterbeer, and many places besides.
"The post office, Harry! About two hundred owls, all sitting on shelves,
all color-coded depending on how fast you want your letter to get
there!"
"Honeydukes has got a new kind of fudge; they were giving out free
samples, there's a bit, look --"
"We think we saw an ogre, honestly, they get all sorts at the Three
Broomsticks --"
"Wish we could have brought you some butterbeer, really warms you up --"
"What did you do?" said Hermione, looking anxious. "Did you get any work
done?"
"No," said Harry. "Lupin made me a cup of tea in his office. And then
Snape came in...."
He told them all about the goblet. Ron's mouth fell open.
"Lupin drank it?" he gasped. "Is he mad?"
Hermione checked her watch.
"We'd better go down, you know, the feast'll be starting in fiveminutes
They hurried through the portrait hole and into the crowd, still
discussing Snape.
"But if he -- you know" -- Hermione dropped her voice, glancing
nervously around -- "if he was trying to to poison Lupin -- he wouldn't
have done it in front of Harry."
"Yeah, maybe," said Harry as they reached the entrance hall and crossed
into the Great Hall. It had been decorated with hundreds and hundreds of
candle-filled pumpkins, a cloud of fluttering live bats, and many
flaming orange streamers, which were swimming lazily across the stormy
ceiling like brilliant watersnakes.
The food was delicious; even Hermione and Ron, who were full to bursting
with Honeydukes sweets, managed second helpings of everything. Harry
kept glancing at the staff table. Professor Lupin
looked cheerful and as well as he ever did; he was talking animatedly to
tiny little Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher. Harry moved his eyes
along the table, to the place where Snape sat. Was he imagining it, or
were Snape's eyes flickering toward Lupin more often than was natural?
The feast finished with an entertainment provided by the Hogwarts
ghosts. They popped out of the walls and tables to do a bit of formation
gliding; Nearly Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost, had a great success
with a reenactment of his own botched beheading.
It had been such a pleasant evening that Harry's good mood couldn't even
be spoiled by Malfoy, who shouted through the crowd as they all left the
hall, "The dementors send their love, Potter!"
Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of the Gryffindors along the
usual path to Gryffindor Tower, but when they reached the corridor that
ended with the portrait of the Fat Lady, they found it jammed with
students.
"Why isn't anyone going in?" said Ron curiously.
Harry peered over the heads in front of him. The portrait seemed to be
closed.
"Let me through, please," came Percy's voice, and he came bustling
importantly through the crowd. "What's the holdup here? You can't all
have forgotten the password -- excuse me, I'm Head Boy --"
And then a silence fell over the crowd, from the front first, so that a
chill seemed to spread down the corridor. They heard Percy say, in a
suddenly sharp voice, "Somebody get Professor Dumbledore. Quick."
People's heads turned; those at the back were standing on tiptoe.
"What's going on?" said Ginny, who had just arrived.
A moment later, Professor Dumbledore was there, sweeping toward the
portrait; the Gryffindors squeezed together to let him through, and
Harry, Ron, and Hermione moved closer to see what the trouble was.
"Oh, my --" Hermione grabbed Harry's arm.
The Fat Lady had vanished from her portrait, which had been slashed so
viciously that strips of canvas littered the floor; great chunks of it
had been torn away completely.
Dumbledore took one quick look at the ruined painting and turned, his
eyes somber, to see Professors McGonagall, Lupin, and Snape hurrying
toward him.
"We need to find her," said Dumbledore. "Professor McGonagall, please go
to Mr. Filch at once and tell him to search every painting in the castle
for the Fat Lady."
"You'll be lucky!" said a cackling voice.
It was Peeves the Poltergeist, bobbing over the crowd and looking
delighted, as he always did, at the sight of wreckage or worry.
"What do you mean, Peeves?" said Dumbledore calmly, and Peeves's grin
faded a little. He didn't dare taunt Dumbledore. Instead he adopted an
oily voice that was no better than his cackle. "Ashamed, Your Headship,
sit. Doesn't want to be seen. She's a horrible mess. Saw her running
through the landscape up on the fourth floor, sir, dodging between the
trees. Crying something dreadful," he said happily. "Poor thing," he
added unconvincingly.
"Did she say who did it?" said Dumbledore quietly.
"Oh yes, Professorhead," said Peeves, with the air of one cradling a
large bombshell in his arms. "He got very angry when she wouldn't let
him in, you see." Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from
between his own legs. "Nasty temper he's got, that Sirius Black."
CHAPTER NINE
GRIM DEFEAT
Professor Dumbledore sent all the Gryffindors back to the Great Hall,
where they were joined ten minutes later by the students from
Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and Slytherin, who all looked extremely confused.
"The teachers and I need to conduct a thorough search of the castle,"
Professor Dumbledore told them as Professors McGonagall and Flitwick
closed all doors into the hall. "I'm afraid that, for your own safety,
you will have to spend the night here. I want the prefects to stand
guard over the entrances to the hall and I am leaving the Head Boy and
Girl in charge. Any disturbance should be reported to me immediately,"
he added to Percy, who was looking immensely proud and important. "Send
word with one of the ghosts."
Professor Dumbledore paused, about to leave the hall, and said, "Oh,
yes, you'll be needing..."
One casual wave of his wand and the long tables flew to the edges of the
hall and stood themselves against the walls; another wave, and the floor
was covered with hundreds of squashy purple sleeping bags.
"Sleep well," said Professor Dumbledore, closing the door behind him.
The hall immediately began to buzz excitedly; the Gryffindors were
telling the rest of the school what had just happened.
"Everyone into their sleeping bags!" shouted Percy. "Come on, now, no
more talking! Lights out in ten minutes!"
"C'mon," Ron said to Harry and Hermione; they seized three sleeping bags
and dragged them into a corner.
"Do you think Black's still in the castle?" Hermione whispered
anxiously.
"Dumbledore obviously thinks he might be," said Ron.
"It's very lucky he picked tonight, you know," said Hermione as they
climbed fully dressed into their sleeping bags and propped themselves on
their elbows to talk. "The one night we weren't in the tower...."
I reckon he's lost track of time, being on the run," said Ron. "Didn't
realize it was Halloween. Otherwise he'd have come bursting in here."
Hermione shuddered.
All around them, people were asking one another the same question: "How
did he get in?"
"Maybe he knows how to Apparate," said a Ravenclaw a few feet away,
"Just appear out of thin air, you know."
"Disguised himself, probably," said a Hufflepuff fifth year. "He
could've flown in," suggested Dean Thomas.
"Honestly, am I the only person who's ever bothered to read Hogwarts, A
History?" said Hermione crossly to Harry and Ron.
"Probably," said Ron. "Why?"
"Because the castle's protected by more than walls, You know,,, said
Hermione. "There are all sorts of enchantments on it, to stop people
entering by stealth. You can't just Apparate in here. And I'd like to
see the disguise that could fool those dementors. They're guarding every
single entrance to the grounds. They'd have seen him fly in too. And
Fitch knows all the secret passages, they'll have them covered...."
"The lights are going out now!" Percy shouted. "I want everyone in their
sleeping bags and no more talking!"
The candles all went out at once. The only light now came from the
silvery ghosts, who were drifting about talking seriously to the
prefects, and the enchanted ceiling, which, like the sky outside, was
scattered with stars. What with that, and the whispering that still
filled the hall, Harry felt as though he were sleeping outdoors in a
light wind.
Once every hour, a teacher would reappear in the hall to check that
everything was quiet. Around three in the morning, when many students
had finally fallen asleep, Professor Dumbledore came in. Harry watched
him looking around for Percy, who had been prowling between the sleeping
bags, telling people off for talking. Percy was only a short way away
from Harry, Ron, and Hermlone, who quickly pretended to be asleep as
Dumbledore's footsteps drew nearer.
"Any sign of him, Professor?" asked Percy in a whisper.
"No. All well here?"
"Everything under control, sir."
"Good. There's no point moving them all now. I've found a temporary
guardian for the Gryffindor portrait hole. You'll be able to move them
back in tomorrow."
"And the Fat Lady, sir?"
"Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor. Apparently she
refused to let Black in without the password, so he attacked. She's
still very distressed, but once she's calmed down, I'll have Mr. Filch
restore her."
Harry heard the door of the hall creak open again, and more footsteps.
"Headmaster?" It was Snape. Harry kept quite still, listening hard. "The
whole of the third floor has been searched. He's not there. And Filch
has done the dungeons; nothing there either."
"What about the Astronomy tower? Professor Trelawney's room? The
Owlery?"
"All searched."
"Very well, Severus. I didn't really expect Black to linger."
"Have you any theory as to how he got in, Professor?" asked Snape.
Harry raised his head very slightly off his arms to free his other ear,
"Many, Severus, each of them as unlikely as the next."
Harry opened his eyes a fraction and squinted up to where they stood;
Dumbledore's back was to him, but he could see Percy's face, rapt with
attention, and Snape's profile, which looked angry.
"You remember the conversation we had, Headmaster, just before -- ah --
the start of term?" said Snape, who was barely opening his lips, as
though trying to block Percy out of the conversation.
"I do, Severus," said Dumbledore, and there was something like warning
in his voice.
"It seems -- almost impossible -- that Black could have entered the
school without inside help. I did express my concerns whet, you
appointed --"
"I do not believe a single person inside this castle would have helped
Black enter it," said Dumbledore, and his tone made it so clear that the
subject was closed that Snape didn't reply. "I must go down to the
dementors," said Dumbledore. I said I would inform them when our search
was complete."
"Didn't they want to help, sit?" said Percy.
"Oh yes," said Dumbledore coldly. "But I'm afraid no dementor will cross
the threshold of this castle while I am headmaster."
Percy looked slightly abashed. Dumbledore left the hall, walking quickly
and quietly. Snape stood for a moment, watching the headmaster with an
expression of deep resentment on his face; then he too left.
Harry glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione. Both of them had their eyes
open too, reflecting the starry ceiling.
137
"\What was all that about?" Ron mouthed.
The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for the next few days. The
theories about how he had entered the castle became wilder and wilder;
Hannah Abbott, from Hufflepuff, spent much of their next Herbology class
telling anyone who'd listen that Black could turn into a flowering
shrub.
The Fat Lady's ripped canvas had been taken off the wall and
Replaced with the portrait of Sir Cadogan and his fat gray pony. Nobody
was very happy about this. Sir Cadogan spent half his time challenging
people to duels, and the rest thinking up ridiculously complicated
passwords, which he changed at least twice a day.
"He's a complete lunatic," said Seamus Finnigan angrily to Percy. "Can't
we get anyone else?"
"None of the other pictures wanted the job," said Percy. "Frightened of
what happened to the Fat Lady. Sir Cadogan was the only one brave enough
to volunteer."
Sir Cadogan, however, was the least of Harry's worries. He was now being
closely watched. Teachers found excuses to walk along corridors with
him, and Percy Weasley (acting, Harry suspected, on his mother's orders)
was tailing him everywhere like an extremely pompous guard dog. To cap
it all, Professor McGonagall summoned Harry into her office, with such a
somber expression on her face Harry thought someone must have died.
"There's no point hiding it from you any longer, Potter," she said in a
very serious voice. "I know this will come as a shock to you, but Sirius
Black --"
"I know he's after me," said Harry wearily. "I heard Ron's dad telling
his mum. Mr. Weasley works for the Ministry of Magic."
Professor McGonagall seemed very taken aback. She stared at Harry for a
moment or two, then said, "I see! Well, in that case, Potter, you'll
understand why I don't think it's a good idea for you to be practicing
Quidditch in the evenings. Out on the field with only Your team members,
it's very exposed, Potter --"
"We've got our first match on Saturday!" said Harry, outraged. "I've got
to train, Professor!"
Professor McGonagall considered him intently. Harry knew she was deeply
interested in the Gryffindor team's prospects; it had been she, after
all, who'd suggested him as Seeker in the first Place. He waited,
holding his breath.
"Hmm..." Professor McGonagall stood up and stared out of the window at
the Quidditch field, just visible through the rain. "Well... goodness
knows, I'd like to see us win the Cup at last... but all the same,
Potter... I'd be happier if a teacher were present. I'll ask Madam Hooch
to oversee your training sessions."
The weather worsened steadily as the first Quidditch match drew nearer.
Undaunted, the Gryffindor team was training harder than ever under the
eye of Madam Hooch. Then, at their final training session before
Saturday's match, Oliver Wood gave his team some unwelcome news.
"We're not playing Slytherin!" he told them, looking very angry.
"Flint's just been to see me. We're playing Hufflepuff instead."
"Why?" chorused the rest of the team.
"Flint's excuse is that their Seeker's arm's still injured," said Wood,
grinding his teeth furiously. "But it's obvious why they're doing it.
Don't want to play in this weather. Think it'll damage their
chances...."
There had been strong winds and heavy rain all day, and as Wood spoke,
they heard a distant rumble of thunder.
"There's nothing wrong with Malfoy's arm!" said Harry furiously. "He's
faking it!"
"I know that, but we can't prove it," said Wood bitterly, "And we've
been practicing all those moves assuming we're playing Slytherin, and
instead it's Hufflepuff, and their style's quite different. They've got
a new Captain and Seeker, Cedric Diggory --"
Angelina, Alicia, and Katie suddenly giggled.
"What?" said Wood, frowning at this lighthearted behavior.
"He's that tall, good-looking one, isn't he?" said Angelina.
"Strong and silent," said Katie, and they started to giggle again.
"He's only silent because he's too thick to string two words together,"
said Fred impatiently. "I don't know why you're worried, Oliver,
Hufflepuff is a pushover. Last time we played them, Harry caught the
Snitch in about five minutes, remember?"
"We were playing in completely different conditions!" Wood shouted, his
eyes bulging slightly. "Diggory's put a very strong side together! He's
an excellent Seeker! I was afraid you'd take it like this! We mustn't
relax! We must keep our focus! Slytherin is trying to wrong-foot us! We
must win!"
"Oliver, calm down!" said Fred, looking slightly alarmed. "We're taking
Hufflepuff very seriously. Seriously."
The day before the match, the winds reached howling point and the rain
fell harder than ever. It was so dark inside the corridors and
classrooms that extra torches and lanterns were lit. The Slytherin team
was looking very smug indeed, and none more so than Malfoy.
"Ah, if only my arm was feeling a bit better!" he sighed as the gale
outside pounded the windows.
Harry had no room in his head to worry about anything except the match
tomorrow. Oliver Wood kept hurrying up to him between classes and giving
him tips. The third time this happened, Wood talked for so long that
Harry suddenly realized he was ten minutes late for Defense Against the
Dark Arts, and set off at a run with Wood shouting after him, "Diggory's
got a very fast swerve, Harry, so you might want to try looping him --"
Harry skidded to a halt outside the Defense Against the Dark Arts
classroom, pulled the door open, and dashed inside.
"Sorry I'm late, Professor Lupin. I --"
But it wasn't Professor Lupin who looked up at him from the teacher's
desk; it was Snape.
"This lesson began ten minutes ago, Potter, so I think we'll make it ten
points from Gryffindor. Sit down."
But Harry didn't move.
"Where's Professor Lupin?" he said.
"He says he is feeling too ill to teach today," said Snape with a
twisted smile. "I believe I told you to sit down?"
But Harry stayed where he was.
"What's wrong with him?"
Snape's black eyes glittered.
"Nothing life-threatening," he said, looking as though he wished it
were. "Five more points from Gryffindor, and if I have to ask you to sit
down again, it will be fifty."
Harry walked slowly to his seat and sat down. Snape looked around at the
class.
"As I was saying before Potter interrupted, Professor Lupin has not left
any record of the topics you have covered so far --"
"Please, sir, we've done boggarts, Red Caps, kappas, and grindylows,"
said Hermione quickly, "and we're just about to start --"
"Be quiet," said Snape coldly. "I did not ask for information. I was
merely commenting on Professor Lupin's lack of organization."
"He's the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher we've ever had,"
said Dean Thomas boldly, and there was a murmur of agreement from the
rest of the class. Snape looked more menacing than ever.
"You are easily satisfied. Lupin is hardly overtaxing you -- I ,Would
expect first years to be able to deal with Red Caps and grindylows.
Today we shall discuss --"
Harry watched him flick through the textbook, to the very back chapter,
which he must know they hadn't covered.
"Werewolves," said Snape.
"But, sir," said Hermione, seemingly unable to restrain herself, "we're
not supposed to do werewolves yet, we're due to start hinkypunks --"
"Miss Granger," said Snape in a voice of deadly calm, "I was under the
impression that I am teaching this lesson, not you. And I am telling you
all to turn to page 394." He glanced around again. 'All of you! Now!"
With many bitter sidelong looks and some sullen muttering, the class
opened their books.
"Which of you can tell me how we distinguish between the werewolf and
the true wolf?" said Snape.
Everyone sat in motionless silence; everyone except Hermione, whose
hand, as it so often did, had shot straight into the air.
"Anyone?" Snape said, ignoring Hermione. His twisted smile was back.
"Are you telling me that Professor Lupin hasn't even taught you the
basic distinction between --"
"We told you," said Parvati suddenly, "we haven't got as far as
werewolves yet, we're still on --"
"Silence!" snarled Snape. "Well, well, well, I never thought I'd meet a
third-year class who wouldn't even recognize a werewolf when they saw
one. I shall make a point of informing Professor Dumbledore how very
behind you all are...."
"Please, sir," said Hermione, whose hand was still in the air, "the
werewolf differs from the true wolf in several small ways. The snout of
the werewolf --"
"That is the second time you have spoken out of turn, Miss Granger,"
said Snape coolly. "Five more points from Gryffindor for being an
insufferable know-it-all."
Hermione went very red, put down her hand, and stared at the floor with
her eyes full of tears. It was a mark of how much the class loathed
Snape that they were all glaring at him, because every one of them had
called Hermione a know-it-all at least once, and Ron, who told Hermione
she was a know-it-all at least twice a week, said loudly, "You asked us
a question and she knows the answer! Why ask if you don't want to be
told?"
The class knew instantly he'd gone too far. Snape advanced on Ron
slowly, and the room held its breath.
"Detention, Weasley," Snape said silkily, his face very close to Ron's.
"And if I ever hear you criticize the way I teach a class again, you
will be very sorry indeed."
No one made a sound throughout the rest of the lesson. They sat and made
notes on werewolves from the textbook, while Snape prowled up and down
the rows of desks, examining the work they had been doing with Professor
Lupin.
"Very poorly explained... That is incorrect, the kappa is more commonly
found in Mongolia.... Professor Lupin gave this eight out of ten? I
wouldn't have given it three...."
When the bell rang at last, Snape held them back.
"You will each write an essay, to be handed in to me, on the ways you
recognize and kill werewolves. I want two rolls of parchment or, the
subject, and I want them by Monday morning. It is time somebody took
this class in hand. Weasley, stay behind, we need to arrange your
detention."
Harry and Hermione left the room with the rest of the class, who waited
until they were well out of earshot, then burst into a furious tirade
about Snape.
"Snape's never been like this with any of our other Defense Against the
Dark Arts teachers, even if he did want the job," Harry said to
Hermione. "Why's he got it in for Lupin? D'you think this is all because
of the boggart?"
"I don't know," said Hermione pensively. "But I really hope Professor
Lupin gets better soon...."
Ron caught up with them five minutes later, in a towering rage.
"D'you know what that --" (he called Snape something that made Hermione
say "Ron!") "-- is making me do? I've got to scrub out the bedpans in
the hospital wing. Without magic!" He was breathing deeply, his fists
clenched. "Why couldn't Black have hidden in Snape's office, eh? He
could have finished him off for us!"
Harry woke extremely early the next morning; so early that it was till
dark. For a moment he thought the roaring of the wind had woken him.
Then he felt a cold breeze on the back of his neck and sat bolt upright
-- Peeves the Poltergeist had been floating next to him, blowing hard in
his ear.
"What did you do that for?" said Harry furiously. Peeves puffed out his
cheeks, blew hard, and zoomed backward out of the room, cackling.
Harry fumbled for his alarm clock and looked at it. It was half past
four. Cursing Peeves, he rolled over and tried to get back to sleep, but
it was very difficult, now that he was awake, to ignore the sounds of
the thunder rumbling overhead, the pounding of the wind against the
castle walls, and the distant creaking of the trees in the Forbidden
Forest. In a few hours he would be out on the Quidditch field, battling
through that gale. Finally, he gave up any thought of more sleep, got
up, dressed, picked up his Nimbus Two Thousand, and walked quietly out
of the dormitory.
As Harry opened the door, something brushed against his leg. He bent
down just in time to grab Crookshanks by the end of his bushy tail and
drag him outside.
"You know, I reckon Ron was right about you," Harry told Crookshanks
suspiciously. "There are plenty of mice around this place -- go and
chase them. Go on," he added, nudging Crookshanks down the spiral
staircase with his foot. "Leave Scabbers alone."
The noise of the storm was even louder in the common roorn. Harry knew
better than to think the match would be canceled; Quidditch matches
weren't called off for trifles like thunderstorms. Nevertheless, he was
starting to feel very apprehensive. Wood had pointed out Cedric Diggory
to him in the corridor; Diggory was a fifth year and a lot bigger than
Harry. Seekers were usually light
and speedy, but Diggory's weight would be an advantage in this weather
because he was less likely to be blown off course.
Harry whiled away the hours until dawn in front of the fire, getting up
every now and then to stop Crookshanks from sneaking up
the boys, staircase again. At long last Harry thought it must be time
for breakfast, so he headed through the portrait hole alone.
"Stand and fight, you mangy cur!" yelled Sir Cadogan.
"Oh, shut up," Harry yawned.
He revived a bit over a large bowl of porridge, and by the time he'd
started on toast, the rest of the team had turned up.
"It's going to be a tough one," said Wood, who wasn't eating anything.
"Stop worrying, Oliver," said Alicia soothingly, "we don't mind a bit of
rain."
But it was considerably more than a bit of rain. Such was the popularity
of Quidditch that the whole school turned out to watch the match as
usual, but they ran down the lawns toward the Quidditch field, heads
bowed against the ferocious wind, umbrellas being whipped out of their
hands as they went. just before he entered the locker room, Harry saw
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, laughing and pointing at him from under an
enormous umbrella on their way to the stadium.
The team changed into their scarlet robes and waited for Wood's usual
pre-match pep talk, but it didn't come. He tried to speak several times,
made an odd gulping noise, then shook his head hopelessly and beckoned
them to follow him.
The wind was so strong that they staggered sideways as they walked out
onto the field. If the crowd was cheering, they couldn't hear it over
the fresh rolls of thunder. Rain was splattering over Harry's glasses.
How on earth was he going to see the Snitch in this?
The Hufflepuffs were approaching from the opposite side of the field,
wearing canary-yellow robes. The Captains walked up to eacb other and
shook hands; Diggory smiled at Wood but Wood no, looked as though he had
lockjaw and merely nodded. Harry saw Madam Hooch's mouth form the words,
"Mount Your brooms.,, He pulled his right foot out of the mud with a
squelch and swung it over his Nimbus Two Thousand. Madam Hooch put her
whistle to her lips and gave it a blast that sounded shrill and distant
they were off
Harry rose fast, but his Nimbus was swerving slightly with the wind. He
held it as steady as he could and turned, squinting into the rain.
Within five minutes Harry was soaked to his skin and frozen, hardly able
to see his teammates, let alone the tiny Snitch. He flew backward and
forward across the field past blurred red and yellow shapes, with no
idea of what was happening in the rest of the game. He couldn't hear the
commentary over the wind. The crowd was hidden beneath a sea of cloaks
and battered umbrellas. Twice Harry came very close to being unseated by
a Bludger; his vision was so clouded by the rain on his glasses he
hadn't seen them coming.
He lost track of time. It was getting harder and harder to hold his
broom straight. The sky was getting darker, as though night had decided
to come early. Twice Harry nearly hit another player, without knowing
whether it was a teammate or opponent; everyone was now so wet, and the
rain so thick, he could hardly tell them apart....
With the first flash of lightning came the sound of Madam Hooch's
whistle; Harry could just see the outline of Wood through the thick
rain, gesturing him to the ground. The whole team splashed down into the
mud.
"I called for time-out!" Wood roared at his team. "Come on, under here
--"
They huddled at the edge of the field under a large umbrella; Harry took
off his glasses and wiped them hurriedly on his robes.
"What's the score?"
"We're fifty points up," said Wood, "but unless we get the Snitch soon,
we'll be playing into the night."
"I've got no chance with these on," Harry said exasperatedly, waving his
glasses.
At that very moment, Hermione appeared at his shoulder; she was holding
her cloak over her head and was, inexplicably, beaming.
"I've had an idea, Harry! Give me your glasses, quick!"
He handed them to her, and as the team watched in amazement, Hermione
tapped them with her wand and said, "Impervius!"
"There!" she said, handing them back to Harry. "They'll repel water!"
Wood looked as though he could have kissed her.
"Brilliant!" he called hoarsely after her as she disappeared into the
crowd. "Okay, team, let's go for it!"
Hermione's spell had done the trick. Harry was still numb with cold,
still wetter than he'd ever been in his life, but he could see. Full of
fresh determination, he urged his broom through the turbulent air,
staring in every direction for the Snitch, avoiding a Bludger, ducking
beneath Diggory, who was streaking in the opposite direction....
There was another clap of thunder, followed immediately by forked
lightning. This was getting more and more dangerous. Harry needed to get
the Snitch quickly -
He turned, intending to head back toward the middle of the field, but at
that moment, another flash of lightning illuminated the stands, and
Harry saw something that distracted him completely , the silhouette of
an enormous shaggy black dog, clearly imprinted against the sky,
motionless in the topmost, empty row of seats.
Harry's numb hands slipped on the broom handle and his Nimbus dropped a
few feet. Shaking his sodden bangs out of his eyes, he squinted back
into the stands. The dog had vanished.
"Harry!" came Wood's anguished yell from the Gryffindor goal posts.
"Harry, behind you!"
Harry looked wildly around. Cedric Diggory was pelting up the field, and
a tiny speck of gold was shimmering in the rain-filled air between them
-
With a jolt of panic, Harry threw himself flat to the broornhandle and
zoomed toward the Snitch.
"Come on!" he growled at his Nimbus as the rain whipped his face.
'Taster!"
But something odd was happening. An eerie silence was falling across the
stadium. The wind, though as strong as ever, was forgetting to roar. It
was as though someone had turned off the sound, as though Harry had gone
suddenly deaf -- what was going on?
And then a horribly familiar wave of cold swept over him, inside him,
just as he became aware of something moving on the field below...
Before he'd had time to think, Harry had taken his eyes off the Snitch
and looked down.
At least a hundred dementors, their hidden faces pointing up at him,
were standing beneath him. It was as though freezing water were rising
in his chest, cutting at his insides. And then he heard it again....
Someone was screaming, screaming inside his head... a woman...
"Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry!"
"Stand aside, you silly girl... stand aside, now...."
"Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead --"
Numbing, swirling white mist was filling Harry's brain.... What was he
doing? Why was he flying? He needed to help her... She was going to
die.... She was going to be murdered....
He was falling, falling through the icy mist.
"Not Harry! Please... have mercy... have mercy....
A shrill voice was laughing, the woman was screaming, and Harry knew no
more.
"Lucky the ground was so soft."
"I thought he was dead for sure."
"But he didn't even break his glasses."
Harry could hear the voices whispering, but they made no sense
whatsoever. He didn't have a clue where he was, or how he'd got there,
or what he'd been doing before he got there. All he knew was that every
inch of him was aching as though it had been beaten.
"That was the scariest thing I've ever seen in my life."
Scariest... the scariest thing... hooded black figures... cold ...
screaming...
Harry's eyes snapped open. He was lying in the hospital wing. The
Gryffindor Quidditch team, spattered with mud from head to foot, was
gathered around his bed. Ron and Hermione were also there, looking as
though they'd just climbed out of a swimming pool.
"Harry!" said Fred, who looked extremely white underneath, the mud.
"How're you feeling?"
It was as though Harry's memory was on fast forward. The lightning --
the Grim -- the Snitch -- and the dementors...
"What happened?" he said, sitting up so suddenly they all gasped.
"You fell off," said Fred. "Must've been -- what -- fifty feet?"
"We thought you'd died," said Alicia, who was shaking.
Hermione made a small, squeaky noise. Her eyes were extremely bloodshot.
"But the match," said Harry. "What happened? Are we doing a replay?"
No one said anything. The horrible truth sank into Harry like a stone.
"We didn't -- lose?"
"Diggory got the Snitch," said George. "Just after you fell. He didn't
realize what had happened. When he looked back and saw you on the
ground, he tried to call it off. Wanted a rematch. But they won fair and
square... even Wood admits it."
"Where is Wood?" said Harry, suddenly realizing he wasn't there.
"Still in the showers," said Fred. "We think he's trying to drown
himself."
Harry put his face to his knees, his hands gripping his hair. Fred
grabbed his shoulder and shook it roughly.
"C'mon, Harry, you've never missed the Snitch before."
"There had to be one time you didn't get it," said George.
"It's not over yet," said Fred. "We lost by a hundred points"
"Right? So if Hufflepuff loses to Ravenclaw and we beat Ravenclaw and
Slytherin --."
"Hufflepuff'll have to lose by at least two hundred points," said
George.
"But if they beat Ravenclaw..."
"No Way, Ravenclaw is too good. But if Slytherin loses against
Hufflepuff..."
"It all depends on the points -- a margin of a hundred either way."
Harry lay there, not saying a word. They had lost... for the first time
ever, he had lost a Quidditch match.
After ten minutes or so, Madam Pomfrey came over to tell the team to
leave him in peace.
"We'll come and see you later," Fred told him. "Don't beat yourself up,
Harry, you're still the best Seeker we've ever had."
The team trooped out, trailing mud behind them. Madam Pomfrey shut the
door behind them, looking disapproving. Ron and Hermione moved nearer to
Harry's bed.
"Dumbledore was really angry," Hermione said in a quaking voice. "I've
never seen him like that before. He ran onto the field as You fell,
waved his wand, and you sort of slowed down before you hit the ground.
Then he whirled his wand at the dementors. Shot silver stuff at them.
They left the stadium right away... He was furious they'd come onto the
grounds. We heard him --"
"Then he magicked you onto a stretcher," said Ron. "And walked up to
school with you floating on it. Everyone thought you were --"
His voice faded, but Harry hardly noticed. He was thinking about what
the dementors had done to him... about the screaming voice. He looked up
and saw Ron and Hermione lookin, at him so anxiously that he quickly
cast around for something matter-of-fact to say.
"Did someone get my Nimbus?"
Ron and Hermione looked quickly at each other.
"Er --"
"What?" said Harry, looking from one to the other.
"Well... when you fell off, it got blown away," said Hermione
hesitantly.
"And?"
"And it hit -- it hit -- oh, Harry -- it hit the Whomping Willow."
Harry's insides lurched. The Whomping Willow was a very violent tree
that stood alone in the middle of the grounds.
"And?" he said, dreading the answer.
"Well, you know the Whomping Willow," said Ron. "It -- it doesn't like
being hit."
"Professor Flitwick brought it back just before you came around, said
Hermione in a very small voice.
Slowly, she reached down for a bag at her feet, turned it upside down,
and tipped a dozen bits of splintered wood and twig onto the bed, the
only remains of Harry's faithful, finally beaten broomstick.