106 


Please note that by imagining that you are healing yourself 
you are not ignoring pain which is natures warning signal that 
something is wrong. Simply killing the pain is only desirable once you 
know what the problem is and once the healing process has started. 

lf you have a particular medical problem and your doctor has 
diagnosed what the problem is you can use the above technique to 
speed up your recovery. 

IF YOU THINK YOU HAVE A SERIOUS MEDICAL 
CONDITION PLEASE SEEK PROFESSIONAL ADVICE. 
THE TECHNIQUESMENTIONED HERE ARE NOT 
INTENDED TO REPLACE ACOMPETENT MEDICAL 
DIAGNOSlS BUT RATHER TO COMPLIMENT IT! 

If you have a diagnosed condition and are using pain killers 
then using Self-Hypnosis to dull the pain, it is probably a good idea. We 
do have a special Hypnotic tape which you can buy from us if you think 
you might need some extra help. (Price £9.95 include p&p). 

The tape included with this release is primarily concerned 
with selfhealing. You can use the above technique in addition to the 
tape The tape does use some other ideas as well which might be 

. 

useful. 

What follows are some basic breathing Qigong exercises as 
promised. It is impossible to explain the subtlety of these techniques by 
simply writing them down, however they serve as a small introduction to 
this ancient and wonderful art. I would say even following a video would 
only convey a fraction of their true power so consider this a way of 
wetting your appetite. I have absolutely nothing to gain whether or not 
you decide to take Taijiquan /Qigong lessons. The point is you have a 
great deal to gain. It is not necessarily expensive either some adult 
education departments offer classes which are subsidised I 

This first set of exercises are ideally to be performed a few 
minutes before you start your trance session. The benefits of Qigong 
exercises are essentially those of providing balance and harmony. 
These exercises are always to be performed in slow motion. Some 
beginners find this very strange and can’t see why you we don’t just 
speed them up and rush through them. This is because in our modern 
existence speed and a hectic pace of life has become the norm. This is 
why most peoples’ central nervous systems are in a constant state of 
hypertension. This undermines the bodies natural energy reserves 
which then undermines their health and shortens their lives. 

107 


By performing soft, slow, movements while doing deep 
diaphragmatic breathing you switch the autonomous nervous system 
over to the parasympathetic mode from the stressed sympathetic 
mode .By doing this your body can rejuvenate itself, and harmonise all 
the vital functions, and produce vital essence like hormones and 
neurochemicals. 

Diaphragmatic breathing means that you draw the air deep 
down into our abdomen. This means that your lungs fill with air from 
the bottom upwards in this way you use all of your lung’s capacity. 
Most people are shallow breathers and only use about 40%. If you 
study how young babies breath and copy them you will not go far 
wrong. 

Stand with your feet shoulder width apart with your hands by 
your side. Make sure you tuck your bottom in so that your spine is as 
straight as it can be. It is important that when you do these movements 
you don’t sway out of line but let gravity simply pass through you into 
the floor. See fig 2(A). The idea is to support your body’s frame without 
using too much effort. Try to relax all the muscles in your legs and 
don’t lock the knees. Don’t make yourself stiff. You probably will not 
get this right over night, it will take a bit of time. 


Now breath in deeply and slowly, as you do bring your arms up in front 
of you as shown in Fig 2 (B), (C). 

Hold the air in your lungs for about three or four seconds, but don’t 
force it, and lower your arms. As you lower your arms, see Fig 2 (D), 
breath out slowly and empty your lungs. Now repeat this process for 
about five minutes or so. 

108 


An important point to note. When you bring your arms up they 
should feel very heavy like lead weights and have as little tension in them 
as possible. As you lift them up keep your shoulders low, don’t raise 
them. Feel yourself getting support from your feet which are rooted to the 
ground. Let the movement of your arms co-ordinate with your breaths 
and just let your mind relax. 

After a while you should feel your mind calming down. Try to let 
the breathing flow naturally, don’t force it. Also make your movements 
slow and graceful and not jerky or sudden. 

The next breathing technique can be performed after a session of 
selfhypnosis or meditation. As before stand with your feet a shoulder 
width apart with your hands by your side. Place the right hand gently 
over the back of your left hand at about waist level. Now raise your 
hands up in front of your chest and then above your head and stretch. 
During this stage you will be inhaling. Now separate your hands and 
bring your arms down either side of you, while exhaling. You can repeat 
this circular breathing motion for about four minutes. 

Just in case you didn’t know it already I hope you appreciate that 
Chinese medicine is a very complex area and it takes many years to 
grasp all the complexities that are involved. Some ignorant people 
consider Chinese Physicians to be nothing more than quacks, however 
they probably don’t know that it takes around fourteen years to train a 
traditional Chinese Doctor compared to around five or seven in the west. 

When western medicine was only just beginning to raise itself a 
little above basic superstition and leaches Chinese medicine had already 
enjoyed a successful track record for at least four thousand years. 
Various physicians down the ages had refined and catalogued various 
recipes and cures for a wide range of disorders using various herbs, 
mineral and animal extracts. By the time western medicine had 
diagnosed illnesses like beriberi and goitre the Chinese had already 
found a cure hundreds of years earlier. In fact the west were starting to 
borrow or steal many cures from China. Quinine as a cure for malaria 
was taken from southern China by a Jesuit Priest who then passed it off 
as his own discovery. Similarly the technique of taking vaccines from 
cow’s blood was first perfected in China and also brought back to Europe 
by Missionaries. 

I know of many people who have turned to Chinese medicine to 
cure their ills because western medicine cannot help them. This does not 
mean that western medicine is in some way inferior. In many of the 
cases that I have personally heard of those people could have avoided 
their conditions by taking simple preventive means! 

109 


Because Chinese medicine is a part of a whole way of life it is but 
one segment of the whole. Yes it is holistic in nature, in that it treats the 
whole body, not just a small area that appears to be affected, but it works 
best when other aspects of life are also taken into consideration. The 
emphasis is on prevention rather than cure. 

Until this century rich Chinese households employed a physician 
to regularly visit the family in order to monitor the health of the whole 
family. It would be his job to give advice on their diet, personal habits, 
and generally regulate their life style to ensure they remained in good 
health. Should anyone fall sick, the family would suspend his salary until 
he had restored them to full health, at the physician’s expense. 

In Taoist philosophy if you live following the certain irrefutable and 
immutable laws by living in harmony with, instead of against nature, you 
will not get sick. This is because the bodies natural defences will repel 
any invasion from attack. If an individual takes care to maintain his or her 
level of health and immunity then it follows that they should not be 
vulnerable to disease. 

“Health is easier to maintain than it is to acquire.” Doctor Russ Jaffe 
(1984). 

The Doctor who made the above statement is a specialist in the 
treatment of AIDS. It is his assertion that healthy people should not 
contract the Disease. 

You have already taken a huge step in improving your own bodies 
well being if you did but know it. By having one or two Self-Hypnosis 
sessions each day you are giving your mind and body a badly needed 
rest where your heart beat can slow to a murmur. Your blood pressure 
can reduce and your brain can have a break from all the cacophony 
which is now modern daily life. 

If you went back a few hundred years what do suppose would be 
the loudest sound we would ever hear? Until gun powder was invented it 
probably would have been a thunder storm or a large water fall. Think 
about what most of us have to put up with every day. 

Without being consciously aware of it our minds are bombarded 
by a constant stream of stimuli every minute of the day from when we 
wake up to when we go to bed. There is electromagnetic and noise 
pollution, not to mention all the other types of pollution, from radios, 
television, telephones, mobile phones, faxes, motor traffic, computers the 
list goes on and on. This is not natural. 

110 


This is why people today feel so stressed. This is why it is so 
important that you have a few precious moments each day when you can 
calm your system down and let it just be. We all need a time when we 
can forget about all our troubles and simply exist. 

I can personally recommend the techniques described in this 
release and some others I will tell you about later on. I cannot remember 
the last time I HAD to go visit a doctor although, because I move around 
a lot, I sometimes have to register with a doctor and have a compulsory 
check-up. It amuses me to see the look on their faces when they take my 
pulse and blood pressure. It is always way below what they would 
normally expect. I not saying I am perfect I still get the odd sniffle, but 
very rarely, and they never last long. 

I have never known my Taijiquan teacher miss a night because of 
ill health. The Grand Master of our particular form of Tai Chi, and his 
wife, are both in their hundreds. They both teach and train every day. 
There is a Qigong teacher I know who returns to China every year for a 
month to retrain with his master. His master is a lady who is at least 105 
and also teaches, and practises, Qigong every day. What is more I heard 
she was considering a visit to Europe to give demonstrations! I know that 
I can feel very tried before a Taijiquan session but after two hours of 
training I feel greatly invigorated. It works! 

What I have tried to do here is show you that our state of health is 
largely in our own hands, or more accurately in our own minds. Some 
people are very sceptical about alternative methods of health care and 
have negative gut reaction to them. It is for this reason I have used 
Chinese cultural and medical examples in this release because their 
theories are firmly based on research and observation over many 
thousands of years. I wanted to show you a different way of looking at 
yourself and your body. You can use Self-Hypnosis to improve your 
health. Each of us does have a life force, or Qi, within us which can be 
strengthened and used to keep us healthy. There is a lot more on this 
subject that I must tell you about, however for now this will have to do. 

The Next release will tell you 
how you can prolong your life and 
look and feel years younger. 

111 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 


Powers Of Your Own Mind! 



Part Six 


Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any injuries 
which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any reader who 
experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material should seek medical 
advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999 - 2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


112 


PART SIX 


“We are more than the sum of our parts.” 


Longevity. 


This months release is closely connected to last months. Obviously to 
live a long life it makes sense that you probably have to be at least aware of 
your state of health and how you feel. Having said that we have all heard 
stories of people who drink a bottle of whisky and smoke sixty cigarettes a day 
living to eighty. This is unusual but not unexplainable. I would suggest that 
these people have an unusually strong and resilient constitution and might 
have lived a good deal longer if they have followed a different or more 
moderate path. 

As you might expect I will use some ideas from Taoist practise and 
philosophy since they are tried and tested. But perhaps we should consider 
the following question:


Why try and live to a great age? 

I think most people would agree that living to a great age in itself should 
not be our prime objective but rather achieving the best quality of life for as 
long as possible. Nobody wants to end up vegetating in a nursing home 
suffering from Parkinson disease or some other ghastly illness. Who wants to 
end up like Tithonus In the Greek Myth who gained the gift, or curse, of 
immortality without the gift of eternal youth. I personally feel it is futile to 
prolong life just because high tech intervention makes it possible. 

“Why seek to add more, just to lose it again, wretchedly 
without joy?” Lucretius. 

When I mentioned that some Qigong masters can live into their 100’s I 
also mentioned that they lived active and useful lives. They still enjoyed life. 
This is quite different from many people who live into their 100’s unable to 
move about, speak, or think coherently. 

The great mystics from India, who practise yoga, and the Taoist masters in 
china all exude great life and vitality/energy you would normally expect from 
someone half their chronological age. These people are not trying to cling to 
life or even fear death. On the contrary they welcome death when it eventually 
comes because it represents their next stage in life. For them life never ends 
there is no death and so no fear. (It is unimportant whether you believe this or 

113 


not I am not pushing any philosophical argument or religious belief here). 

The aim of the mystic as he sees it is to develop himself spiritually as 
far as possible in this life and attain enlightenment. Once they have achieved 
this they believe it is their time to move on. 

Now for us lesser mortals I would assume we mainly want to enrich 
the quality of our lives and live a long and active existence. 

Do you remember that I said that modern science’s view of our 
universe has very strong similarities with the concepts that Taosts, and 
nearly all other mystics from the east, have held for over a thousand years. 
Well I need to develop this a little if you are to get anything from this months 
release. 

In the early thirties Modern physics went through a disturbing 
development. Three physicists Albert Einstein, Boris Podoisky, and Nathan 
Rosen carried out an experiment the conclusion of which became known as 
the “Einstien-Podolsky-Rosen paradox” or EPR. The experiment was a 
“thought experiment” in other words it was carried out on paper since there 
was no money, time, or equipment, to carry out the experiment any other 
way. (They did not have access to particle accelerators). 

They had decided to take this step because they had come up against 
problems in their research which could not be solved using existing 
conventional methods. 

EPR has been described as “The Pandora’s box of Modern Physics” 
and it would not be an exaggeration to say that it turned the scientific world 
upside down. There is no doubt that you need to do some serious mental readjustment 
to begin to grasp the implications but in essence their concept is 
really quite a simple idea. 

I don’t want to go too deeply into all the amazing aspects of this 
research in this release. I will have to come back to this subject at a later 
date but I have to tell you little about it because it has a great deal to do with 
all of us and the question of ageing and longevity. 

I also wanted to mention the names of Einstein, Podoisky, and Rosen 
to show that what I am about to say is not the work of some crank of lunatic 
but is partly based on the theories of some of this centuries greatest scientific 

114 


minds. I don’t want you to dismiss what you are about read out of hand. 
Some of you may well find the contents of this release shocking, and 
unbelievable. I apologise in advance for this but it cannot be avoided. As 
always I would ask you to please keep an open mind. 

The problem with most people is that they have come to regard their 
world as a concrete reality. As I write this I am seated on a solid wooden 
chair which supports my weight. It looks solid and I believe it to be solid 
because when I touch it, it feels solid. However any physicist could explain to 
me that the form of the chair in actual fad is made up of space and is far from 
solid. 

The chair consists of millions upon millions of atoms. Each atom 
consist of a nucleus containing smaller particles called protons and neutrons. 
Surrounding the nucleus at some distance revolve electrons. In fact through 
the study of quantum physics we know that 99.9999 of every atom is in effect 
empty space. You see if we believed our senses we would still think the 
earth was flat and the ground you stand on does not move. Albert Einstein 
deduced that time and space are the results of what our five senses 
observed. In the quantum world there are no definite qualities, lines or 
boundaries. 

The extent of our senses are in actual fact very limited. We can only 
sense detect a tiny fraction of what is out there. Our view of the world is 
entirely based on only a tiny fraction of the data that our limited sensory 
allows us to observe. There are many creatures on this planet which 
perceive the world very differently. Our hearing is extremely poor compared 
to a dogs whose sense of smell is also a million times more sensitive. Bats 
use ultra sound to navigate their way around and snakes can see by using 
infrared. 

It had long been known that nothing really has any solidity but is in 
effect made up of tiny amounts or bundles of energy. Before the EPR 
paradox most physicist thought the quantum theory propounded that the 
universe consisted of a mass of separate parts and energies independent of 
one another. The view that modern science is slowly moving towards is that 
the universe is in effect fundamentally linked in some way. 

To the mystic this idea is nothing new but has been their fundamental 
thought for centuries. To the mystic the binding link is an all pervading 
“cosmic intelligence”. 

“The universe looks less and less like a great 
machine and more and more like a great thought!” 

115 


Each and everyone of us and everything else in the universe is made 
up of atoms of matter which have been in existence since the dawn of time. 
Whether we like it or not we are all part of the Quantum universe which is in 
a constant flux of change and transformation. It is estimated that there are 
six trillion reactions taking place in each of our cells every second! The 
condition and state of the cells in a person’s body are unique to that person. 
Their condition is dependant upon the unique experiences that a person has 
had throughout their life and how those experiences have been allowed to 
effect the metabolism of their bodies. 

Our bodies are under constant attack every single day from pollution, 
radiation, ultraviolet light, among many other things. If a cell from your body 
was removed and placed on a glass slide and left outside for just a few 
moments it would die. 

On the cosmic scale of things there are great forces at work which are 
ever ready to destroy life. So why does life exist at all? 

Entropy:


Described as “formal lack of organisation” in my dictionary is in reality 
the nature of things to move from order to disorder. In other words to 
breakdown. The existence of entropy has been with us since the dawn of 
time ever since the “big bang” and the beginnings of our universe. It has 
been described as a one way track and the process cannot be reversed at 
least not without intervention. 

Negative Entropy:


Whenever energy collects with matter and forms orderly 
systems then the tendency of entropy is temporarily defied. In physics this is 
what is known as “Negative Entropy”. Sometimes these fields of negative 
entropy last for a very long time, for example galaxies, stars, and planets but 
eventually they all dissipate. The whole universe is heading in this direction 
although the final “death” will not be for billions of years. 

It is entropy which causes our bodies to age. It is the slow but ever 
present tendency for order to breakdown into chaos which causes our bodies 
to deteriorate over time. If you want to stop or slow down this process you 
have to learn how to stop or slow down entropy. 

116 


The mystery of life with its extraordinary complexity is a counter force 
to entropy. The evolution of life would not be possible without a fundamental 
intelligence guiding it along. The cosmos has been described as a living 
entity which is constantly evolving from its early primitive into more and more 
complex states. 

If we could preserve the perfect balance and condition of our bodies 
as they were when we were first born it is estimated that we could live to two 
hundred years or more. Although all the substances, chemicals, and 
elements which go into making a new born baby have been in existence for 
billions of years they are not new in themselves. However some creative 
order or power has dictated the shape and form these substances will take, 
in this case a baby. 

AGEING 


The extraordinary thing about the human body is its ability to repair 
itself against to ravages of entropy. As I have already said our bodies are 
under constant attack and yet our human DNA contains all the information 
needed to allow our bodies to renew itself The great mystery is that this 
process is ninety nine percent efficient. What baffles scientists is what 
happened to the remaining one percent? To learn the answer to this one we 
would need to know the secret of life. 

After the age of thirty our bodies undergo this slow and almost 
imperceptible change as our cells repair themselves slightly less efficiently 
than before. Eventually each cell suffers more damage and ageing occurs. If 
this were not the case and our cells repaired themselves perfectly all the time 
we would never age. 

Some people have put forward the theory that growing old and death 
is a product of conditioning rather than the concrete reality most of us 
assume. 

Most of us think that we have a life span of between seventy and 
maybe ninety years of life but what is a “natural” life span? Over recent years 
the average life span of people in the western world has risen as better 
medical techniques have been developed. So it could be argued that people 
live longer these days because we can keep the ravages of disease and 
chronic sickness at bay. The World Health Organisation has estimated that 
people live world-wide to an average of 68 and that this figure will increase to 
73 during the early part of the next century. 

117 


By the first quarter of the next century people In Britain, for example, 
can expect to live to 80. In the USA it is expected that life spans of 95 or 100 
will be the norm by 2050. Some western scientists predict 140 is achievable. 

In the ancient Taoist annals are listed many gifted adepts of the “way” 
who lived to great ages by carefully nurturing and protecting their vital 
energies. During the Han Dynasty we learn of a Leng Shou-kang who lived to 
over 150 and improbable as it sounds there was another named Wu Tzu-tu is 
reported to have lived to the age of 205. John Blofeld in his book “The Road 
to Immortality” quotes an article published in 1939 in one of China’s main 
newspapers of the time about a man from Szechuan province. 

Born in 1796 having retired as a secretary to the military 
authorities on the Yangtse River Region he travelled to Tibet in 
search of rare medicinal plants and herbs. Having gone for so long 
nobody expected to see him again and thought him dead. However in 
1931 he reappeared and many aged people recognised him as 
somebody they used to know when very young. It was said that despite 
his great age he did not look any older than 50 and had hardly changed 
at all! 

When I was very young I remember asking my father why a certain 
relative, who’s picture was being shown to me, was not still around today. I 
was told that he had died. I was intrigued at this and asked how had he died 
and I was told he had died of “old age”. I was not totally satisfied with this but 
it was a kind of answer. Death and dying are intriguing concepts for the 
young mind. Most people die from a failure of one or more of the body’s 
mechanisms. It could be the heart, kidneys, whatever. Dying from “old age”, 
which was described by professor Raymond Tallis of Hope Hospital Salford 
as “the gradual but harmonious failure of all organs”, is not that common. 

Is Ageing Inevitable? 

What is ageing? Some would say that our perception of ourselves and 
the world around us are personal and unique to each individual. One 
person’s view of themselves and their world around them could be utterly 
different to another. Two people could be standing in a beautiful garden on a 
perfect sunny day but have totally different view of the experience. One 
might feel bored and fed up staring into space while the other could be 
transfixed and overawed by natures beauty. 

The assumption that we all have to grow old, decay, and die within an 
allotted time span ignores the fact that we are more than just biochemical 
mechanisms. We are not machines that wear out, breakdown, and are then 
put on the scrap heap, although this is the firmly held view of most people. 
You might wonder why I should make such a statement since it flies in the 
face of everything we have ever learnt or have been told about the so called 
“real world” or “material world”. 

118 


There are three ways to judge the age of someone. The first and most 
obvious is to ask them when they were born and calculate how many years 
old they are. This is know as “Chronological age”. 

The next way is to give people a battery of tests to see how they 
respond. Typical tests include stamina, hearing, co-ordination, blood 
pressure, levels of cholesterol, and many more besides. This gives an 
indication of someone’s “Biological age” We have all met people who look 
very young for their age. Some Qigong masters fall into this category. What 
has happened is their chronological age differs from their biological age. 

Lastly but certainly not least is a persons “Psychological age”. This 
is how old you feel inside. I know people who appear to act as though they 
were fifteen years older. This is very common if someone has been brought 
up with elderly parents particularly if they were an only child. 

Chronological age is fixed and so cannot be altered, however it is the 
most misleading yard stick of all because it is largely irrelevant to the subject 
of ageing. Unless you just want to be able to collect your pension! It does not 
reflect how old you truly are. After all everyone is unique and we all age in 
our own way. 

I know people in their fifties who appear more alert who are fitter than 
others in their twenties. An athlete in his forties who continues to work out 
will have developed the same or better muscle tone as someone in their 
twenties. This where Biological age come in. The trouble with biological age 
is that because we all age in such a unique way it is difficult to get an 
accurate picture of what is involved. The athlete in his forties might have the 
strength and stamina of someone in their twenties but his hearing or eyesight 
might have deteriorated because of the unique factors effecting him in his 
life. 

Scientists are constantly trying to invent new ways of measuring 
peoples age but at the end of the day it is very subjective. 

What we do know about Biological age is that it is possible to change 
it. In other words you can reverse your biological age. Many “elderly” who 
have been put on regimes of healthier diets and regular exercise have 
managed to reduce the harmful effects of obesity, high blood pressure, and 
low muscle mass, etc. These are some of the factors which make up a 
persons Biological age and on average these people can expect to extend 
their life by about ten years. 

Hereditary factors have surprisingly little effect on a persons life 
expectancy, only somewhere between 2%-3%. 

119 


By far the most important factor in influencing a persons age is their 
Psychological age. How old and how you feel. This is not only the most 
important influence but it is the most flexible. 

One of the characteristics of “old age” is stiffness in the body but also a 

stiffness or rigidity in the mind:


“When he is born, man is soft and weak” 

“In death, he becomes stiff and hard” Lao Tze. 

In America in the 1950’ s a study was made to see if they could find 
out what personal characteristics centenarians had in common which could 
explain their ability to reach such a great age. Listed below are some of the 
things that were considered important factors: 

1. 
An ability to react to change in their life with a positive 
adaptability. 
2. 
A sense of being free from anxiety. 
3. 
Being able to create. 
4. 
An ability to react positively to new things in their life. 
5. 
A zest for life, a desire to live. 
Out of all of this research the single most important factor was how 
they reacted to stress. It was how they managed to cope psychologically with 
the stresses in life. Everyone suffers from stress from time to time, whether it 
be from a bereavement, shock, whatever. However it is the ability to release 
this stress from our system so that it is not allowed to eat away at us that 
really counts. 

Human beings are capable of altering our physical state, as we have 
seen in the last release, by the kind of things we think of or situations we 
react to. Out mental attitude effects our bodies on the smallest level 
imaginable. Every cell in our body is affected by our thoughts. When we get 
seriously depressed the effectiveness of our immune system is impaired. 
When we feel great joy and happiness our immune system is greatly 
boosted. It is because of this fact, that the mind has such a strong influence 
on our body that the rate at which we age can be speeded up or slowed 
down. 

THE RATE AT WHICH YOU AGE IS UNDER YOUR CONTROL! 

There that’s shocked some of you. Incidentally this is not a particularly 
new discovery as you would expect it has been known about in the east for 
ages. There has been tons of research in the west which confirms this fact. 

120 


As soon as you take a bite out of an apple your mouth will start to secret 
enzymes which start the digestive process. Perhaps there is nothing 
mysterious about this however if you were to imagine or simply thought 
about eating an apple your mind would trigger the exact same response 
even though there is no food present. 

This simple example shows you that it is the thought that is important 
and not the physical reality of food being present or not. Your thoughts are 
not things however your thoughts turn them into things. 

You read last month about the placebo effect in producing K cells 
(Killer Cells) in fighting cancer. Similar effects have been achieved by giving 
patients a sugar pill but telling them that it is in fact a powerful pain killer. 
Between 30% and 40% will experience pain relief when all they have in fact 
taken is just a sugar pill. This kind of experiment has been tried with patients 
suffering from all sorts of aliments with a similar degree of success. Even 
people suffering with advanced stages of cancer have been known to have 
significant remissions after receiving injections of a salt solution but being 
told that it is a new strong anti cancer drug. 

If a simple sugar pill, i.e. placebo, can produce such a wide range of 
effects within the body it is logical to assume that the mind and body can 
produce virtually any biochemical reaction it wants. It only needs the right 
suggestion to be made and accepted by the subconscious. 

So why not give yourself positive affirmations while under self 
hypnosis that you feel young and full of vitality? You know enough about self 
hypnosis to be able write out a suitable script. When you done this take a key 
word and chant it to yourself while in a trance state. 

Why is it then that we appear to “grow” old? What is it that makes this 
happen? This is question which has puzzled most people over many years. 

In the animal kingdom many species sole reason for existence would 
seem to be the recreation of the species. A dragon fly only lives one day and 
having mated dies. Mice are capable of producing around two hundred offspring 
and only live for an average of about two years. Their natural life 
spans are short but are highly energetic. It would be pointless for a mouse to 
live for two hundred years because their would not be the resources to 
support them at this rate. In most case in nature the relative life span of a 
creature is dependant upon resources and their chances for survival due to 
predators. 

121 


Sadly for the mouse there is a very good chance of being eaten. 
Because of this nature has arranged things so that there should be a good 
numerical chance that at least some of a couples off-spring will surviving to 
carry on the dynastic fine. 

We differ from animals in an important way, we can reason. We 
are conscious of what is happening to us. For some researchers this is 
thought to be the secret to longevity! 

Humans on the other hand are not destined to die as soon as they 
have had a family. In most cases we live on many years later. It seems that 
there is not the same imperative that we should cease to have any useful 
function after fulfilling the primary role of reproduction. Men can remain 
sexually active for many years but women have a relatively short child 
bearing range however statistics show that women seem to live longer than 
men. So why should we age at all? 

As a new born baby our bodies are free of all the toxic products which 
affect us as we get older. 

Our bodies are undergoing constant change all the time. Outwardly 
we do not appear to alter at all, however about 98% of our bodies mass will 
have been changed in any one year. You are undergoing this process of 
change every second of the day or night. Your whole system is in a constant 
flux. 

After the age of thirty this process of renewal becomes slightly less 
precise. Imperceptibly at first, at a rate of about 1% per annum, the “average” 
person starts to become less new than before. This seemingly tiny 
percentage over time has a disastrous effect and reaps havoc on our bodies 
over time. 

What some people now thinking is it possible to influence this rate of 
change in some way. 

By becoming aware can we alter our so called reality? 

In western society we state that someone has finished their useful 
working life at sixty five or sixty. Some people miss the routine of going to 
work and feel depressed in retirement. They get under the feet of their wives 
and perhaps made to feel useless. Because of this mental state these can 
age rapidly and become sick. In societies where elders are respected and 
continue to enjoy an active life the appearance of old age is less marked. 

122 


Conditioning The Mind:


Do you remember what I said about your use of language:


Never EVER say anything to anybody about yourself unless you want it 

to become true. 

Don’t say “Oh I feel so old” when you just mean you feel tired. They 
are not the same things at all. All the first statement does is to enforce a 
negative image which is not true any way. 

Back in the bad old days of the cold war in the 1970’s the soviet 
regime were anxious to score propaganda point against the west. One of 
their schemes involved claiming that some of their people lived to incredible 
ages compared with anyone in the west. 

One character in particular was singled out for by the soviets for 
special mention was Khfaf Lazuria, a woman from Abkhasia. It was claimed 
that she was 140. Visitors found her to be a small frail woman but very agile 
with a lively sense of humour. She did not need glasses because her eye 
sight was good enough to allow her to thread a needle without them. 

Unfortunately what the western visitors did not realise was that it is 
the custom in Abkhasia to exaggerate somewhat and even to tell outright lies 
to strangers. It was extremely unlikely that anyone in Abkhasia lived to 120 
much less 140. The problem was that since the purges under Stalin nearly all 
the birth and death records had been destroyed. So even the soviet 
government had no way of telling how old the people were. Most of the 
population were illiterate and did not know when their birthdays were. But the 
interesting thing was that as a people they didn’t much care about keeping 
track of time. The situation became even more confusing because some 
people used the Christian calendar and others the Moslem one (which uses 
a ten month year). 

You may wonder why I am telling you all this. Well there is a point to 
be made here. The Abkhasians living to a great age is considered a great 
achievement and virtue. Old people are treated with great respect in their 
community. Although the claims of people living to 140, 150, could not be 
verified the soviets did find records of significant numbers of people reaching 

123 


ages of 115 and beyond. The important point to note here is that Abkhasians 
were conditioned to and expected to live to great ages. 

Their life style was very much one closely connected to their land and 
they were very much in touch with the rhythms of nature. They worked in the 
fields breathed fresh clean air and ate good wholesome food. 

Most of the food they ate were vegetables. They also consumed a fair 
amount of dairy produce. However to my mind one of the most significant 
things was the importance they placed on the freshness of their food. 
Vegetables were picked only just before they were cooked. On special 
occasions when they might eat meat the animal would be slaughtered shortly 
before the feast. In this way the precious enzymes and nutrients would not 
be lost in the preparation. In fact most food would be eaten raw but if they did 
cook they tended to boil it. Nothing appeared to be fried. They are one of the 
few cultures in the world were they were very aware of the harmful effects of 
fat in the diet. 

This strong attention to diet and their tendency to live very active 
physical lives obviously had a great influence on their longevity. But I would 
say it was their mental approach and positive expectation of achieving a long 
and useful life that played a very crucial role. 

In the west old age is considered a curse. Our old people are shut 
away in nursing homes. To most western minds old age is feared. The west 
has developed a “youth culture”. Youth is respected and venerated. Some 
companies routinely sack and get rid of their work force when they reach 
forty. This not only short-sighted but it is stupid and reckless. Some firms 
consider people past it at thirty! 

I believe this is one area where we should re-think our attitude. 

The Abkhasians are not an isolated example of a people or culture 
who attach such importance to exercise, wholesome fresh food, and a zest 
for life. 

Anyone who has studied Yoga or Taoism will know that such things 
are given great importance. 

124 


The Three Treasures:


Protecting The Three Treasures:


In Taoist philosophy we are all brought into this world empowered with 

the three treasures. Those who waste and abuse them will suffer sickness, 
disease and a short life. Those who learn how to enhance and nurture them 
will enjoy good health and a long life. 

The three treasures are as follows:


1. ESSENCE. (Jing) 
2. ENERGY. (Qi) 
3. SPIRIT. (Shen) 
Essence relates to our physical bodies, the blood, tissue, 
particularly our vital fluids like enzymes, hormones, etc. 

Energy was touched upon in last months release and relates to our life force 
which permeates every single part of our body and allows us to function. 

Spirit deals with our thoughts and awareness. 

In Taoist philosophy these three treasures should work together in 
harmony. When we are born we possess a quantity of prenatal energy or 
“primordial energy” or yuan-qi. This is stored in the adrenal cortex and sexual 
glands and is of limited supply. We also absorb a form of prenatal energy from 
the sky and cosmos beyond. We do this mainly through a point called (bahue) 
on the top of the head and via our skin and eyes. 

Once we are born we get postnatal energy known as “dee” which 
relates to our diet. What food, herbs, other supplements we eat and the water 
we drink. The body transforms these substances into energy which enables 
our bodies to function. 

When we breathe we absorb energy from the air. This energy can be 
cultivated to amazing levels by the practise of Qigong as you learned in last 
months release. When these three energies combine and function together it 
produces what is known as “True Human Energy” It is the control and 
enhancement of the energy that forms the guiding principal of Qigong training. 

125 


Taoist philosophy is a big subject and goes far beyond the scope of 
this course however if you are interested there is a very informative and 
entertaining book that I recommend you read. It is called “The Tao of Health 
Sex And Longevity” by Daniel Reid . It is described as a modern practical 
approach to the ancient way and is published by Simon & Schuster. 

It really is a great book and you will be fascinated by what you learn 
from it, not least the section dealing with the ancient sexual techniques! 

There is a large section dealing with the subject of diet with some 
useful information on what foods are effective in curing certain aliments. It 
explains why eating some foods makes you feel sluggish while eating others 
makes you feel energised. 

As with verything else in Taoist philosophy when dealing with your diet 
they look for a balance of Ying and Yang. They are also very careful about 
the combination of different foods and their effect on the digestive system:


Food and drink are relied upon to nurture life. 
But if one does not know that the natures of substances may 
be opposed to each other and one consumes them 
altogether indiscriminately, the vital organs will be thrown 
out of harmony and disastrous consequences will soon 
arise. Therefore , those who wish to nurture their lives must 
carefully avoid doing such damage to themselves. 

Chia Ming. ( Essential Knowledge for Eating and Drinking) AD 1368. 

Originally our digestive systems were evolved to deal with foods like 
fruit and vegetables. In time our bodies developed the capacity to digest 
meat when this became a part of our diet some 75000 years ago. However 
most dieticians these days warn us not to eat too much red meat like beef, or 
pork and instead urge us to east poultry or fish. 

Taoists have long considered domesticated animals as a poor source 
of meat. This is due to the fact that such creatures traditionally fed on a diet 
of left-overs and slops from the kitchen. Today there is also the question of 
antibiotics and other artificial additives which our animals are routinely fed. 

126 


Far better for you is wild game particularly wild venison which is 
readily available these days. The reason why such meat is better for you is 
because of what the deer eats, wild nuts, leaves, etc., is natural and full of 
goodness. 

However even this meat won’t do you much good if you over cook it. It 
should be only lightly cooked so as not to destroy all the nutrients, enzymes 
and vitamins. 

Studies show that the incidence of heart disease, strokes, diabetes, in 
America soared during this century compared with the last century. Then 
Americans did not eat as much fat and processed food hardly existed. They 
ate much more fibre and a much greater proportion of vegetables. 
Consequently chronic disease was lower. Certainly in some primitive cultures 
where their diet is more natural and consists largely of a vegetarian diet 
these diseases are almost unknown. 

Attention to diet on its own is not the main feature in the character of 
centenarians but a bad diet is certainly connected to disease and premature 
ageing. 

So it is not a bad idea to give your diet a little thought! 

There is a bewildering amount of advice around these days about 
diets and what you should and should not eat. I am certainly not going to add 
to this advice because it has already been worked out by much better and 
more experienced people than I. It is a very large subject and to really 
understand the basics of what is involved you should read Daniel Reid’s 
book I mentioned earlier. 

What I will do is list some of the basic pointers: 

1. Try to eat organic produce if possible. Try to avoid food 
which has been contaminated with pesticides and other unnatural 
contaminants. 
2. You should eat wholesome food as fresh as you can 
possibly get 
it. In this way you eat, and absorb, all the precious nutrients 
before they get destroyed. 
3. Try to eat food as close to its raw state as possible for 
similar reasons given above. If you can don’t ruin the nutritional 
value of some meat or fish, by over cooking it. 
4. Try to eat a greater proportion of vegetables and or salads 
and cut down on the amount of red meat and pork in your diet 
127 


There are a hundred more things I could say but the above points give 

you the general idea. 

I have not mentioned the subject of exercise this is because most 
people are aware of its importance to your health. Again there are many 
studies and lots of information which show that regular exercise is very 
effective in reducing the rate at which our bodies biologically age. It 
increases muscle mass, strengthens the bones, is good for the heart, blood 
circulation and blood pressure. 

One important point I will make is that you should be careful you don’t 
over do it. Too much physical activity can wear out the body just as easily as 
it can rejuvenate it. Running marathons at the age of eighty may be a good 
thing but not if you only started running at the age of seventy five. You have 
to be sensible. 

This is why I am such a fan of (Taijjiquan or Tal Chi). You learn to be 
aware of your body and how nature intended you to move your body around 
naturally. Armed with this knowledge other more strenuous physical activity 
is much more effective and less damaging to the joints etc. However yoga is 
good, so too is the western technique called “Alexander Technique”. Your 
local library will have books on this subject and can probably put you in touch 
with a teacher. 

128 


Stress Enemy Number One! 


Without doubt the most important factor affecting our state of 
health and so in turn our chance to live to a great age is our ability 
to deal with stress! 

This is why this months’ cassette tape deals with how to deal with stress. 
It is well known that chronic stress is the main cause for immune deficiency in 
our world today. Unfortunately there is a tendency to treat stress with drugs that 
appear to give temporary relief but which in fact cause more damage 
psychologically in the long run. 

It is not an exaggeration to say that around 80% or more cancers 
owe their origins to one kind of stress, mental strain, or similar cause. 
Scientists have discovered that mental pressures of this kind cause the 
body to produce neuropeptides which are chemicals which have a 
powerful suppressive effect on our immune system. They have found a 
direct pathway from the brain which proves without doubt that these 
chemicals can stop immune cells in their tracks. Once this happens 
bacteria, harmful microbes, and cancer cells are able to enter the body! 

Meditation and Why You Should 
Practise It:


Meditation and Your Biological Age:


Meditation/ Self Hypnosis is with out doubt one of the best ways to 
reduce the negative effects of stress on the system. The problem with stress is 
that the body reacts to it extremely quickly so it is hard to counter it consciously 
before some of the harmful chemicals have been produced in the brain. 

Studies have shown that the levels of adrenaline and other substances 
associated with a stress triggered response are markedly lower in people who 
habitually practise meditation. Incredibly western medicine did not even suspect 
that this was the case until around the early 1970’s! 

129 


Even ignoring the spiritual side of mediation I self hypnosis for the 
moment the benefits to your health become obvious to anyone who has 
practised it even for a comparatively short time. Transcendental Meditation 
was specially singled out for use in the west because it is an amazingly 
simple technique and very effective. It was thought for reason to be better 
suited to western minds compared to the more advanced and esoteric 
methods used in the east. 

When some researchers taught transcendental meditation to a 
group of octogenarians in the Boston area of the USA they discovered 
that ALL of those who practised TM each day for twenty minutes were 
still alive three years later! Of the others who did not practise 
meditation thirty eight percent (38%) had died. 

Some air forces train their pilots to use TM because they find it 
increases their efficiency and concentration. 

The object of meditation is to quieten the mind and clear it of all 
thoughts so that you can simply exist and get close to the real you or the 
creative intelligence within us all. Their are different schools and techniques 
of mediation but the goal is normally the same. 

It is very difficult to calm the mind because it likes to have lots of 
random pieces of information flowing in and out all the time. If you don’t 
believe me just try and think of nothing at all. It is virtually impossible 
because the very act of thinking “there I have cleared my mind” means you 
mind is no longer clear. The Chinese have many expressions for this 
problem “taming the monkey” among others. 

The way Transcendental Meditation works is really very simple. 
Rather than trying to empty the mind you simply relax for about thirty 
seconds and then silently chant a mantra. A mantra is just a word or sound. 
It would traditionally be a word from Sanskrit. Some try and make out that 
the mantra has a religious significance but I believe the meaning is 
irrelevant. In fact the more innocuous the word the better because you are 
trying to calm the mind. If you use a word with some special significance the 
chances it will start the mind racing away which is the opposite of what you 
are trying to do. 

When I first learned TM we were told never to divulge our mantra to 
anyone else because it might be used against you. The teacher would take 
each of us in turn and whisper a sound in our ears. We were led to believe 
that each mantra was unique to us and very special, which in a way it was, 
but I never believed it was unique 

130 


Now in a moment I am going to tell you what mantra I was given 
about twenty years ago. Before I do I want to tell you what I believe to be the 
purpose of the mantra and why they chose the sound they gave to me. 

Clearing the mind is an extremely difficult thing to achieve, as we 
have already seen, which even masters of Zen Buddhism take many years of 
long patience and practise. The object is to still your thoughts and go into a 
deeper level of consciousness. So how do you quieten the mind? Well this is 
where the mantra comes in. You see if you are focusing on the sound of the 
mantra it is difficult for any other “more distracting” thoughts to enter your 
mind. Lets face it your not going to find your inner self if your constantly 
thinking about “has anyone fed the cat” or “what should I cook for dinner”.. 
etc. 

The mantra also has to be as gentle and as soft a sound as possible 
because any abrasive words with too many syllables will only annoy the mind 
and prevent it from calming down and entering a trance state or altered 
consciousness. The mantra that was given to me was:


If you say this to yourself over and over again you will notice that it 
has a very soft rhythmic sound. The object of the exercise is to occupy the 
conscious mind with something so that you access your subconscious. This 
is why I do not make a distinction between hypnosis and meditation. 

We were told that from time to time other thoughts would sneak into 
our conscious thoughts. When we became aware of this we would very 
gently start to silently chant the mantra once more and the distracting 
thoughts went away. Now and again the mind would become so still that 
there would be no extraneous thoughts, not even the mantra being chanted. 
This is when you reach into your inner self and your mind is perfectly still. 
This is when your body is most rested and when the most good is achieved 
from this kind of meditation. 

As soon as you are aware of this state you are no longer there of 
course because the act of being aware is in itself a distraction. After about 
twenty minutes we would stop chanting the mantra and bring ourselves back 
to full consciousness. 

When we go to sleep, to reach the state of maximum relaxation takes 
about five hours. 

