54 


Remember your subconscious mind does not respond to logic or 
rational argument. Don’t be tempted to take short cuts and miss out the odd 
bits. This will retard your progress. Remember your subconscious has taken 
many years to build its view of you and the world around you so do not expect 
to change things over night. These exercises have been tried and tested and 
they work and work very well. 

Don’t Look Back Look Forward! 

Before we get started there is one thing I will mention. It has some 
bearing on what I said earlier. Sometimes people are very bitter and angry 
about their past. They feel a lot of resentment towards a parent or an ex-
spouse or whatever. This state is sometimes called “acting the Victim”. 
Unfortunately anger is a very destructive emotion. It eats away at you inside. It 
occupies valuable areas of the mind that would be better employed making 
your life worthwhile and meaningful. 

know this is much easier said than done. I know of some people who 
have not spoken to a parent for years on account of something that was said 
or done years before. Both refuse to be the first one to break the ice. If you 
can it is good to get this kind of thing off your chest. If you are not bothered 
whether you speak to someone or not that does not matter. What I am 
referring to is the kind of nagging resentment that clouds you day from time to 
time and distracts you from your much more important task/goal of getting the 
most happiness and satisfaction from your life. 

It takes a big person to admit they were wrong or to make the first 
move. If you can you should try to bury the hatchet, preferably not the other 
person’s back. If the person you have a grudge against is still alive give them 
a ring and say you forgive them. You will not believe the relief this can bring. 

Often the other person is incredibly relieved as well. If you cannot ring 
write to them. If they are dead simply talk to them as though you think they 
can still hear you. I know it sounds daft but can work wonders. There is no 
room in your life now for any kind of negative thoughts. They are a nuisance 
and get in the way. You don’t want them and you don’t need them so throw 
them away. Put them behind you for ever. Turn the page. What is past is past! 

Incidentally you don’t have to like the person you are forgiving. This is 
not necessary. You talk to them in your imagination. The important thing is to 
mean it and say it with feeling. 

55 


I have met people who have spent thirty or more years of their lives 
feeling bitter and resentful towards someone or something that affected them 
in their life. It might have been a bitter divorce or a failed business deal, or an 
opportunity that was never taken at the time. The “what if syndrome” or “if only 
I had done such and such”. Most of us have been prone to this kind of 
negative harking back to the past from time to time. This kind of thinking is 
rather like walking down the high street with your head looking permanently 
backwards over your shoulder. Not only do you get a crick in the neck but you 
will walk into people and trip over things or even walk in front of a lorry! 

I remember very well watching a news item about a forthcoming trip to 
Japan by a member of the Royal family. There seemed to be two opinions at 
the time. One group of former prisoners of war, who had been captured by the 
Japanese during World War Two and endured much torment and hardship, 
were understandably upset that such a visit should have been contemplated. 
The other view was put forward that it was now time to forgive and move on in 
life. They were not saying that we should all forget what had happened but 
that the war was a long time ago and keeping this hate going all this time was 
not healthy. The strange thing was that this conciliatory view was expressed 
by a fair number of other prisoners of war who had also suffered terribly at the 
hands of the Japanese. 

Now this situation had a profound effect on me. lt was obvious that 
those opposed to the visit were very angry old men and who could blame 
them. Some of their stories made me feel sick and angry towards the 
Japanese however I could only be feeling a tiny fraction of the anger they 
must have felt. You could see the strength of feeling in their whole being. You 
could tell that the last forty years of their life must have been blighted by their 
simmering thoughts of hate and resentment.. 

When the others put their counter view I was humbled by the way in 
which one ex-veteran in particular spoke about his experiences during 
captivity. There was an astounding difference in his demeanour and those in 
the first group. He was a wonderful man and appeared very serene. He didn’t 
defend what the Japanese had done but accepted it was war. He seemed to 
know in his heart that it was pointless harbouring dark resentful, even 
vengeful, thoughts towards the Japanese. It was plain that he was more at 
peace with himself and the world around him, than the others had been. If you 
like, he had come to terms with his experiences and was obviously more 
healthy in mind and spirit. 

I only mention this because if someone can endure what these people 
went through and manage to forgive their oppressors surely we can forgive 
those people who have caused us pain and suffering. I am not using this 
example as some sort of yard stick of suffering. Suffering is relative to the 
individual. Some people reading this might feel they have suffered even more 

56 


than these prisoners. We are all different. What I am saying is that if you can 
forgive and put your negative past behind you, you will get much more from 
your remaining time on this world in terms of quality. The last thing I want to 
do is turn this into an evangelistic crusade but the Lords prayer does say 
“forgive us our trespasses and those who trespass against us”. 

ELIMINATE GUILT. 


Guilt can be one of the more destructive emotions that can burden our 
lives. Just as you must forgive “those who have trespassed against you” you 
must also learn to forgive yourself If you feel guilty about something you have 
done in the past say out loud that you are sorry. Admit that you acted badly. If 
necessary ring the person effected or write to them and tell them you are 
sorry. If this is not possible just say out loud, as I have said, that you are truly 
sorry for you past actions and regret the harm, heart ache, upset they caused. 

Don’t waste time going over past regrets, cherishing your past 
mistakes, shedding tears over opportunities lost! Eleanor Roosevelt was 
asked how she had so much energy for so many different projects, she 
replied “be cause I never waste time looking back”. 

Lets get back to your “Positive Self Image”. 

If we are going to change and build our PSI we must first remember 
how the subconscious mind functions. First of all it does not really like cold 
logical arguments. The subconscious mind responds best to EMOTION and 
FEELINGS. It also likes IMAGES. So the more we can appeal to these three 
things the greater our success. 

What we have to do is ensure that we get more POSITIVE feelings 
directed towards us and cut down or eliminate the number of negative 
emotions that come our way. 

STEP ONE. Reduce the number of negative strokes in your life! 

Now this could be difficult to achieve if you are currently in an unhappy 
relationship of some kind. This could be an unhappy marriage or it might be 
that you are still living at home with your parents and there is constant friction 
in the house. These are two of the most common sources of negative emotion 
in my experience. Of course there are others. Working for an unkind or 
bullying boss for example. However out of the three I would say that an 

57 


unhappy marriage, or relationship, must be the worst case scenario. 

Hopefully for most of you this will not present too many problems and 
you will be able to skip this section and move on. If you are happy and content 
in these areas then great you can skip this bit and go on to step two. 

Two people who were once close and know everything about each 
other can do a lot of harm to each other emotionally. They know the weak and 
vulnerable areas to probe and twist the knife in. If you are in such a 
relationship you must be very clear in your mind what it is you want. Your 
options are as follows:


1). You can leave the relationship. 

2). You can decide to salvage it by taking positive active steps and 
discuss your problems and differences, on your own or with a 
councillor. (Some of the techniques taught in this course will help here). 

3). You can stay as you are. 

If you take options one this can be very painful initially but virtually 
everyone who takes it is nearly always glad that he did! 

Option two may seem attractive but can be hard work. It can be very 
hard work to salvage a damaged relationship but sometimes the effort is 
worth it. Some marriages/relationships are much stronger as a result. 

Option three is not really an option. It is more like emotional suicide. If 
you really want to be happy and achieve anything in life then forget this one. I 
cannot think of anything worse than this. Many excuses are given for just 
sticking together. For the sake of the children is a common one but any child 
who has experienced an unhappy home life will tell you they would have 
preferred their parents to have split up. The emotional strain and harm that 
can be done to a child in my opinion vastly out ways the reasons for slogging 
it out together. There have been many studies carried out on this subject and 
the weight of professional opinion tends to back up this up. Apart from 
anything else what kind of life is for the parents? After all you deserve, or owe 
it to yourself, to be happy! 

58 


STEP TWO. “Give yourself a hug every morning”. 


What’s this? Give yourself a hug? This is getting strange! Well it makes 
more sense than you might think. Do you remember I told you that you would 
come across things that sounded strange or bizarre? I can assure you that I 
am deadly serious about everything in this course. It is based on many years 
of serious research and study. How do you feel when a close friend or loving 
relative gives you a hug? Do you feel bad? No of course you don’t. 

To illustrate the point imagine how you would feel if someone you 
knew came up to you if the street and waved and said it was good to see you. 
lf this person failed to smile or show any positive body language your 
subconscious would dismiss the gesture and your PSI would remain 
unchanged or even harmed in some way. Your subconscious would search 
for the emotional content and the feelings behind the gesture and find none. 

Compare this with someone coming up to you with a beaming smile 
and putting their arms around you and giving you a big hug but saying 
nothing? Your subconscious would get that message straight away and your 
PSI would get a big boost. 

The problem is that it is hard to get people to walk up to you and give 
you hugs all the time. In fact the more you ask people the less inclined they 
will be to oblige. It is strange but it seems that the people who need the 
affection from others seem to get it least and those who appear happy, 
confident, and positive seem to get love and attention all the time. Why is 
that? 

Obviously if you appear to be upset or depressed for some reason 
people will rally round and show concern and try and help. The problem is if 
you appear needy on an ongoing basis people will quickly learn to steer clear. 
So if you cannot rely on a steady line of people to rush up to you each 
morning and give you a hug you will have to do it yourself! 

When I say “give yourself a hug every morning” I am speaking 
metaphorically of course. The following exercise will probably sound very 
strange to you but I can assure you it is very powerful. What you have to do is 
this. Each morning when you get up and go into the bathroom look into the 
mirror and say one or more of the following things:


59 


1.) “I like myself”. (you can repeat this as often as you 
like.) 
2). “ Good morning, you’re looking really great today” 
3). “My god your a really terrific guy/girl”. 
4). “You and I are really going places” . 
5). “I feel really terrific this morning”. 

You probably get the picture. You can add to this list or even use all 
the ideas given. It is also a good ideas to vary the script a little. The most 
important point to remember is to feel as positive and warm towards yourself 
as possible. In fact I would urge you to use the first example each and every 
day. You can say it or think it as many times as you like. This phrase “I like 
myself is short and direct and to the point. I guarantee if you say it to yourself 
twelve times with feeling while looking at yourself in a mirror you will find it 
impossible not to smile at yourself! Try it and see if I am wrong, but remember 
to use feeling. Remember your subconscious responds best to emotion. 

if you carry out this exercise a few times a day for a month you will 
start to notice the difference. You will feel your self esteem begin to swell 
inside you. You will feel more confident and positive. Many people have been 
taught this technique and have received tremendous benefits. They say that 
they were surprised that something so simple could be so effective! 

Don’t expect to convince your subconscious that “you like yourself” if the night 
before you drank a whole bottle of whisky, you have a splitting head ache, 
and your mouth feels like the inside of a bird cage. You may find that there 
could be a wee bit of resistance. Remember the subconscious cannot hold 
two opposing views at once. 

Don’t look into mirror and say “God I look old” or “I look fat, or ugly”. 
This is the very bad habit to get into. Don’t do it! 

STEP THREE, Give yourself a treat:


Some people feel guilty if they buy anything or do anything for 
themselves. They feel it’s selfish. If they do buy something for themselves 
they invariably feel obliged to buy things for loads of other people as well. 
Now if you are the kind of person who regularly does nice things for 
themselves then good you can skip this part but if not read on. 

60 


Patting yourself on the back and rewarding yourself is a perfectly 
natural and good thing to do. We all know we should encourage children by 
giving them praise and encouragement so why not do the same for ourselves. 
I am not talking about being selfish and going on some kind of credit card 
binge this would create far more problems than it would solve. However you 
should get into the habit of rewarding yourself from time to time without feeling 
guilty. If you feel uncomfortable with this suggestion don’t worry it is simply 
because your PSI needs a little work. 

Guilt is another of those nasty negative emotions that we all have to 
learn to deal with. As I have said before guilt is a burden a break on your life 
and serves no useful purpose. The only solution is to counter it by developing 
good thoughts about yourself and those around you. Giving yourself little 
treats now and again will help. 

STEP FOUR. Control your own thoughts:


There are a number of immutable laws governing the mind the most 
important of which is that “ we become what we most think about”. If you 
constantly dwell on negative or depressing thoughts then don’t be surprised if 
you get or feel depressed. The more positive you can be on a day to day basis 
the better. If you think you tend to be the kind of person who dwells on the 
negative side of things then make it your aim to re-educate your mind. 

It is known that conscious mind can only hold one idea or thought at 
any one time so if we can develop the habit of having positive and constructive 
thoughts in our mind then it is hard for any negative or destructive ones to get 
through. 

The subconscious and conscious minds are a team. They work best 
when they work in harmony. Problems only really occur when they are in 
conflict with each other. 

I have written a script that you can use in the way described in part two. 
You can make your own hypnotic tape or use the one I have enclosed with 
this months release. Ideally you should use it once every two days for a month 
during your waking hours and every other night when going to bed. Playing 
the tape a bed time is OK. It does not matter if you fall asleep since your 
subconscious mind will still get the message. It never sleeps. 

The tape will make it much easier to re-educate your mind and help 
you become a much more positive person. This coupled with other techniques 

61 


mentioned here will ensure you will develop the best state of mind possible to 
achieve all your aims and goals in life with absolute confidence. 

I appreciate to some of you the idea of simply thinking positively 
sounds a bit quirky but it does work. The quality of the content of our mind is 
what determines how we feel. Do we like to feel angry, depressed, sad, 
anxious, fearful? Of course we don’t but often it seems impossible to change. 
However all these states of mind are under our control if all but knew it. Let 
me illustrate a point. 

imagine you are getting up to go to work on a Monday morning and it is 
raining hard outside and the wind is blowing a howling gale. You are running 
late and when you get to the office you know you have some difficult calls to 
make or difficult people to deal with. Lets face it you feel daunted. Just before 
you leave for work the post arrives and you pick it up and stuff it into your brief 
case to read on the train. Eventually you get to the station after braving the 
elements. 

You feel cold and your feet feel wet and when you get on the train you 
find there are no seats so you have to stand all the way. After a few moments 
you remember the post you picked up and so you decide to open it. Apart 
from the usual bills there is an envelope you don’t recognise so you open this 
first. To your total amazement it’s from the Premium Bond Office stating that 
you have won £50,000. 

Now just imagine what your state of mind would be like at this time. In 
an instant your feelings of doom and gloom would disappear. Your worries 
about the coming days chores at work would vanish and you know you have 
the ability and confidence to deal with anything the day could throw at you. 
Your people at the office would see you breeze in smiling and happy throwing 
yourself into your work with gusto. Somehow those difficult calls you had to 
make didn’t seem so difficult after all and eventually the day is over and you 
return home. 

You run yourself a hot bath and pour yourself a drink and relax with a 
big contented smile on your face. You are washed and dressed and feel great 
when suddenly then the phone rings and its your old mate Fred. Fred is 
giggling at the other end and unable to contain himself he explains he sent the 
letter from the Bond office and it was all a joke. Then you realise that today’s 
date is April I st. 

Now after you have torn a strip off him and called him every name 
under the sun you stop to think and recall how you felt at that precise moment 
you got that letter. The letter was a fake but how did you feel and how 
did you react to your day at work. Were your feelings false or where they true 
feelings? 

62 


You see feelings are always true. You can have good feelings or you 
can have bad ones. What would you rather have? The point is that you now 
understand more about how the mind functions and how Hypnosis can help 
you. You have more control and choice in your life today than at any time in 
your past. 

You have the power to eliminate negative thoughts from your 
life right now. USE IT! 

I want to move onto another important area that needs work if you are 
to achieve everything you want from life. However before I do let me just give 
you an example of the effect NSI or inadequate self-image. In America a real 
estate company were expanding their business and needed to recruit top 
flight salesmen. They put ads in numerous papers stating the truth that people 
willing to come to work for them could make $50,000 a year. To their surprise 
the response was very disappointing so astute advertising man suggested 
they change one small bit in the advert. Can you guess what it was? 

The bit they changed was the figure. Instead of $50,000 they changed 
it to $20,000. They then ran the advert once more. The response brought in 
ten times the number of replies. Because of the huge response they were 
able to pick the very cream of the crop. 

Now you understand the effects of NSl and PSI you can see why the 
first advert failed. Most people do not think themselves worth $50,000, they 
put a limit on their true worth or value. Fortunately the real estate firm had a 
training programme to promote strong PSI and many of the salesmen who 
were taken on for the job went on to earn far more than $50,000. 

Incidentally the criteria the company used in making their selection was 
not age, education, or experience. They chose those people who were willing 
to learn and to change! 

63 


THE “I CAN FACTOR”:


To succeed in life you need to have two things in good supply. A 
strong PSI and a strong “I Can Factor”. A strong PSI is the much more 
important of the two nevertheless you should aim to build up both if you really 
want to succeed. 

In this last section I want to touch on the subject of the “I can factor”. 
This is more usually known as the “I can’t factor”. This is not the same as PSI 
or NSI although there are similarities and connections. PSI is to do with how 
we feel deep down about ourselves. How much we love and respect 
ourselves. PSI as you know is essential for a happy and fulfilled life. 

The “I can factor or lOF is more to do with your feelings as to how able 
you are to do things. ICF is generally something that is more tangible. Some 
people are very confident in their abilities. Karen who I mentioned earlier was 
a very able person. This was obvious from what she achieved in things in her 
life. She achieved good A level grades, she was a fine and talented musician, 
she has now become an excellent and highly respected teacher. All these 
things are tangible. Karen’s problems were entirely to do with her deep routed 
emotions, the intangible things. Karen had a very good ICF otherwise she 
would never have achieved what she did. 

This is not altogether surprising. In Karen’s case she felt unloved by 
her mother and so tried to gain her admiration and attention by being 
successful in other spheres of her life. Of course it didn’t matter what she did 
it would never be enough for her mother but the compulsion to try would 
always be there. This kind of behaviour is fairly common. 

To find out what your current level of ICF is like I would like you to 
answer the following questions as truthfully as you can. Tick the answer that 
you feel most comfortable with. 

1. Do you think you have the ability to pass all the exams necessary to 
fly a plane? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

64 


2. Do you think you are capable to speak five different languages 
fluently? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

3. Do you think you could learn to play Piano or Violin to concert 
standard? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

4. Do you think you could develop the skills necessary to become a 
formula one driver? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

5. Do you think you could ever study hard enough to become eminent 
brain surgeon? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

6. Do you think you have the ability to generate enough earnings to retire 
in ten years time without ever having to worry about money again? 
Answer; no never, I don’t think so, maybe, I think I could, yes of course I 
could If I really wanted to. 

Now I depending on you answers I want you to award points in the 
following way:


1. No never = one point. 
2. Don’t think so = two points. 
3. Maybe = three points. 
4. I think I could = four points. 
5. Yes of course I could if I really wanted to = five points. 
I f your total scored between six and ten points then you have a very 
low ICF and we will have to help you improve on this. 

65 


If your score was between twelve and seventeen then you ICF is low 

and below average. 

If you scored eighteen to twenty three points then your ICF is average. 

If you scored twenty four to twenty nine points then you have an IOF 
which ranges between good to very good. Well done. 

If you scored thirty points then great your level of ICF is excellent. 

The fact is regardless of your score everyone of you could have got 
and should have got thirty points. I know that if you had only one arm 
becoming a concert pianist could be a bit of a problem. Although Maurice 

Ravel composed one of his finest pieces of music for a pianist friend 
who had lost his right hand in the first world war. The work was of course his 
famous piano concerto for the left hand. Some may think that flying a plane 
could be difficult if you had no legs but that didn’t stop Douglas Bader the world 
war two fighter ace. 

I want you to realise that we could do all of those things and more if we 
decided we wanted to. 

A lot of people mope around feeling pretty useless at most things when 
in actual fact everyone has the capability to do practically anything they want. 
The only limitations are the ones we put on ourselves! 

In Part Four I will go into the whole subject of goal setting in 
detail and why it is so important. 

You will be shown little known techniques that will catapult 
you to forward in life. These techniques are incredibly 
powerful. They work and work well. 

With these powerful tools at your disposal and your new 
knowledge of Hypnosis you cannot fail. It is impossible. 

66 


How To Tap The Incredible 

Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind! 


Part Four 
Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999- 2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


67 


PART FOUR 


“If you don’t like where you are, change it! You’re not a tree.” 


Jim Rohn. 


Someone once told me that there are only 
four steps to achieving anything you want 
out of life. 

Firstly know exactly what you want. 

Secondly, and most importantly of all, believe that you are worth it. 

Thirdly, know that you are capable of achieving it. 

Lastly go out there and get it. 

Knowing exactly what you want out of life is the most important step. If 
you don’t know what you want how can you go and get it? 

The second step, believing you are worth it, is equally important as I 
explained last month. A strong PSI is essential if you are going to succeed in 
anything and have a happy fulfilling life. 

Belief in your ability is the next step because if you know what it is you 
want and you believe you deserve it you must be able to achieve it. 

The fourth step is really the least important of all. If you think about it 
stands to reason. If you know what you want, believe you deserve it, believe 
you can get it, what is left to stop you? It is just a straight forward matter of 
going out and getting it. 

I know some of you will think this is a bit simplistic. Oh yeah it’s all right 

for him so say that but he:


………has never had the bad breaks in life l’ve had. 
…….. he’s not black. 
….…..he’s probably not poor like me. 
.……..he’s not a woman, if he was he would know it’s totally different for us. 
………he’s probably had a chance to go to college, I never did, my parents 
couldn’t afford to send me. 


68 


Last month I told you how to achieve step two. In this month’s release I 
want to help you achieve the other stages. 

Step three is concerned with your I Can Factor in other words believing 
you have the ability to achieve what it is you want. ICF is based on rational 
objective thought. What concerns us here is building inside of you a belief that 
you are ABLE to get what you want. This is deferent from last month when we 
were trying to convince you that you were WORTH having everything you 
want from life. 

A lot of people have a very low expectation of what they can do. This is 
great shame when in reality virtually all of us are capable of so much. We are 
alt human beings endowed with amazing properties. As I have already said in 
part one our brain is the most sophisticated biological computer known and is 
capable of the most staggering feats. When you consider that we only really 
use less than 2% of its potential how can anyone doubt their true capabilities. 

When we are born we each of us have certain inherited characteristics 
and perhaps certain latent talent passed down to us. The trouble is when our 
parents bring us up we tend to accept their view of the world and the 
limitations that go with it. 

Our parents are our first role model and we tend to look up to them and 
want to be like them. After all it is by copying them that we gain praise and 
affection. If we try to stray from their path conflict soon follows. It is usually not 
until our teens that we start to question what we have been told about life the 
universe and everything. 

In America studies have shown that children brought up in families 
living off the state are much more likely to follow their parent’s example and 
live on welfare hand-outs to. It your parents are professional types who have 
worked hard and gone to university then it follows that you will probably follow 
suit. It does not mean you will but at least it will not appear to be something 
out of the ordinary. If your father or mother went to Oxford university you know 
you have their genes inside you. It would not seem impossible to you or 
anyone else if you managed to follow in their footsteps. 

If you compare this scenario with a child brought up in a poor 
household whose parents hardly ever worked and who didn’t achieve much at 
school. It does not take a genius to work out that this child is going to be less 
likely to go to college. This is going to be particularly true if any success on 
their part at school goes unrecognised or unsupported. 

69 


If you compare this scenario with a child brought up in a poor 
household whose parents hardly ever worked and who didn’t achieve much at 
school. It does not take a genius to work out that this child is going to be less 
likely to go to college. This is going to be particularly true if any success on 
their part at school goes unrecognised or unsupported. 

I am not saying here that the child is deprived of love and affection 
indeed the child might develop a good sense of self worth or PSI. All I am 
saying is that child is more likely to doubt his or her ability in the academic 
field even if both children in the above examples had exactly the same IQ. 

I am not saying child B is some kind of lesser citizen compared with 
child A. I am just using this a very basic example to show you one way in 
which a person can restrict their progress because of a lack of good ICF. 

People with low lOF and NSI tend to blame external factors to explain 
why they have not achieved much in life. If you found yourself agreeing with 
the remarks I made earlier i.e.:“It’s all right for him he had stinking rich 
parents” or” You can’t expect to get on in life with my kind of background, I 
never had the breaks others had” or “It’s so unfair some people get all the 
luck, why can’t I be lucky just once”. 

Then you almost certainly suffer from a negative self image, NSI, and 
more than likely a negative ICF. 

The above are not the real reasons why people don’t get what they 
want, they are just excuses. There are a great many people in the world who 
“make it” despite having poor parents, a bad background, or whatever. One of 
the most extraordinary examples of someone with very strong ICF but 
disastrously low PSI was a young man called Richard. 

Richard had been brought up in a succession of children’s homes. He 
had been badly abused as a child. He had little or extremely poor education 
and could barely read or write as a result. 

But despite these handicaps he managed to build up several highly 
diverse and successful businesses and made a fortune in the process. From 
literally nothing he made close to $1,OOO,OOO when he sold his business 
on. 

Sadly because of his background and therefore his poor emotional 
state he had to spend a lot of time in mental asylums. During his more lucid 

79 


moments, when he didn’t think he was Napoleon or Jesus, he bought and 
sold companies for enormous profit. I often think of him when I feel myself 
sliding back a little. After all if its just money your after he proves that virtually 
anyone can make a fortune. Richard did this without having inherited a penny 
from anyone, no education or training, absolutely nothing, Zippo. 

Luck is one of the most pointless excuses of all. We all have about the 
same amount of luck good or bad as the next person. I know some people win 
the lottery from time to time but these people are so few and far between 
make no difference. They might win a lot of money, buy an expensive car and 
drive into a tree and end up dead or paralysed for life. 

People who rely on luck to change their situation are wasting the most 
precious thing they have, their life. They are just dreaming. 

The following might be a typical example of a response from someone 

with low ICF:-“Do you speak fluent French?” 

“Oh no I am useless at languages, I just know a few odd words.” 

Someone with a positive ICF might reply:


“Do you speak fluent French?” 

“Oh no I just know a few words really. I will learn it properly one day when I get 
more time though.” 

You see the difference. You might not want to learn French or fly a 
plane or become a concert pianist but you could do if you wanted to. One 
reason people often develop a negative ICF is because they fear failure. This 
is sometimes described as a fear of success. To say you can’t do something 
gives you a very good excuse for not bothering. Instead of saying you can’t do 
something just say you can’t be bothered, the chances are this statement 
would be more honest. 

This is why many people hate to see anyone they know really make a 
success of their life because it may highlight how dull and unfulfilled their own 
lives are. It reminds us of what our lives might have been like if we had only 
tried a little. 

71 


There are good reasons why people are like this. You have to 
remember your subconscious is keen to keep you as you are. Your early life 
and background have programmed a lot of preconceived ideas and notions 
about you and how you fit into the world. It will analyse everything you hear, 
read, see and run it past the fixed view it has of the world it has built up over 
the years. 

As you know with regard to your PSI no amount of reasoned logical 
argument will persuade it to give up its preconceived ideas about you. Your 
subconscious will for similar reasons resist you trying to change the level of 
ICF, however if you work on your PSI then it should be possible to build your 
ICF at the same time. 

This is why hypnosis is so useful. Under hypnosis you can appeal to 
the emotional side of the subconscious. It may not want to change but that’s 
just too bad. With the right techniques you can change it. 

How can you tell the difference between PSI and ICF? 

This is a good question. Sometimes it is very difficult, if not to say 
impossible, to tell the difference because both things are closely connected 
with each other. This does not mean they are always the same as I hope I 
have shown, however a NSI will often cause a negative ICF. This is why it is 
important to work on both fronts. It is harder to build a PSI than it is to build a 
positive ICF and I will give you some exercises later. 

The most important point to remember is whatever the reasons you 
may have for a poor ICF it is within your power to remedy this situation. The 
only person who can limit you possibilities to expand and grow, IS YOU! 

A lot of people have a hankering to be rich. They would like to be 
successful millionaires, even famous. However those same people deep 
down doubt they will ever make more than a modest living wage. In fact most 
people will retire on a derisory pension after working in some dead end job all 
their lives. 

These same people deep down think that they will never be rich. They 
don’t believe they have what it takes and or they don’t think they really 
deserve to be rich. They have been programmed to expect little out of life and 
so deep down that is all they will aspire to, for all the reasons I have 
explained. 

72 


I am not saying everyone has this wish but judging by the general 
public’s appetite for the lottery it does seem to be a commonly held dream. 
Each week millions of people put their faith in a I in 14,000,000 chance of 
winning the jackpot. 

Incidentally I have chosen wealth purely as an example you 
might not crave wealth but I will use it as a convenient goal as an 
example. What I have said can apply to any goal in life. 

The fact is there is absolutely no reason why anyone should not 
become a millionaire by their own efforts, if that is what they really want. 

IF YOU CHANGE THE PROGRAMME YOU CHANGE THE END 
RESULT! 

It is as simple as that but many of you won’t believe me. Do you 
suppose a successful entrepreneur doubts his or her ability to succeed. NO! 
There was a survey in the USA which questioned many young people who 
had made more than $1,000,000 before they were thirty. 

What was particularly interesting was that without exception they all 
made their money out of several different unrelated businesses. Often 
building up one business selling it and moving on to the next. Not all of them 
were successful straight away many failed, and failed badly, in the early days. 

The point is they all believed they would make it one day. Their 
setbacks didn’t put them off course. They stuck to their goals. In other words 
they refused to doubt their ICF and their PSI. Any setbacks they suffered 
were regarded as merely obstacles to be overcome. 

Now this is a vitally important point because it is our perception of life 
and how react to it which makes the crucial difference. It is our programming 
which determines our perception. One person might think a business 
“failure” might be better viewed as a “setback’s. What’s the difference? 

It is just a different word but I think you will agree the effect on your 
emotions is quite different. Failure carries with it all sorts of negative 
connotations which we have formed in our minds from an early age. We might 
have some painful memories associated with the word failure. This one word 
might cause a person feel depressed. However the word setback wouldn’t do 
anything of the kind. The word setback sounds transitory and temporary. 

By changing the way we perceive things we can change 

72 


the way we react to them. Your choice of language is all 
important when building a positive ICF or a PSI for that 
matter. 

From this day on I want you to be extremely careful what 
you say about yourself. 

Never EVER say anything to anybody about yourself 
unless you want it to become true. 

Don’t put yourself down in public. “Oh I couldn’t play 
tennis, I am useless, I have got no co-ordination.” 

This is your Negative ICF talking. By not making negative statements 
about yourself your will programme your subconscious into believing that you 
are actually capable of doing ANYTHING. 

This is not just confidence building, although there is an element of 
this, it is more subtle than that. It seems very simple, which it is, but it works. 

If someone asks you to go flamenco dancing with them don’t say:- “oh 
god no I’ve got two left feet I could never do that”. A better response would 
be:-” Well I have never done it before but what the hell it could be fun”. 

Now I want to make a point here you don’t have to actually do any of 
these things. It simply means you could do them if you wanted to. If you 
simply don’t want to do it just say so. “Oh I don’t think I would enjoy flamenco 
dancing. I am sure I could do it if I tried it’s just I don’t enjoy that kind of music. 
I went to show once and it was not for me”. 

If you apply this simple little technique you will be amazed at the 
changes it will make to your attitude. In fact at first you might be shocked how 
negative you are about yourself For the first few days you might have to 
check yourself several times a day however this technique alone can make a 
vast difference to your ICF. 

The next step is to take responsibility for you own life 
and stop blaming others for the state of your life. 

74 


As I mentioned in part three guilt is a very damaging negative emotion 
and has to be removed from your life. So is the habit of apportioning blame to 
other people for any misfortunes in your life. It does not matter if they are 
responsible. It does not matter if you are responsible. This point has already 
been covered but is worth mentioning again. Don’t use expressions like:


“You make me so angry.” 

“You really hurt my feelings when you do that”. 

What you really mean is:


“I make myself angry”. 

“I let myself feel hurt when you do that”. 

There is a big difference between these two examples. You are 
responsible for how you react to a given situation. Obviously if someone 
punches you in the face for no reason you are going to feel hurt. 

If you are being punched in the face on a regular basis you could 
always take up some form of martial art or avoid a particular area, pub or 
whatever. The remedy is still under your control. NOW TO BUSINESS! 

This next step is vital to your success in building a strong I CAN 
FACTOR. Don’t worry about putting into practise for the moment because I 
will show you how it all fits together with what you have already learned. Now 
I would like you to write down a few things for me, you will need them a little 
later on:Please write down on a piece of clean white good quality paper the 
following statements. Use a good quality pen. Write carefully and neatly. If 
you make any mistakes do it again! 

I achieve everything I set out to achieve. All 
opportunities I are available to me. 

Every single day I become more and more positive in my 
attitude and actions in life. This makes me more and more 
open and successful in everything I strive for. 

Now keep this paper safe because we will need it later. Now lets move 
onto the next section. 

75 


The Importance of Goal Setting:


Why is goal setting so important. Setting goals is a way of crystallising 

your aims and desires in life. It makes you sit down and think about what it is 
you are striving for. What’s important to you. There have been so many 
books written about this subject so I don’t want to go on and on about it here. 
However because this is such an important area, if you are at all serious 
about improving your life, I must say a few words on the subject. 

If you have never come across goal setting then you really should read 
up on it as it is going to be vitally important to you. There was a well known 
experiment carried out at Harvard University. What they did was to check up 
on the progress of a number of former students from the 1950’s some thirty 
years later. Out of those that had survived they discovered that 5% owned 
more than 95% of the total wealth acquired by all these former students. 

This puzzled the researchers at Harvard so they asked the former 
students to complete a list of questions to see if there was any way of finding 
out why so few a number of students could have acquired so much wealth. I 
wonder if you can guess what the 5% did that the other 95% didn’t. 

That’s right they set themselves regular goals in life. 

Setting yourself goals are essential if you want to achieve anything in 
life however there is a right way and a wrong way to set out your goals. The 
first step you must take is to decide what you want. Sounds simple doesn’t it, 
but you would be amazed how many people go through life without any real 
idea about where they are going and what they want from life. Most have the 
usual flight of fancy about disappearing off into the sunset on a fabulous 
luxury yacht leaving all their troubles behind them, or of winning the lottery or 
football pools. But these are just day dreams, they never seriously expect 
them to come true. 

Have you ever thought about what you want your life to be like in say 
ten years time, or five years time, or even one years time? Many people just 
amble from day to day and let chance or “life” just dictate what will happen to 
their health, relationships, finances, job prospects, in the years to come. 

Don’t worry if this sounds a bit like you. In fact it is quite common.Just 
as an experiment and to help you to think a bit about how your life is going I 
want you to complete the following questionnaire. Please try to fill it out as 
accurately and as honestly as possible. Also please keep such forms 
confidential. DO NOT SHARE THIS INFORMATION WITH ANYONE ELSE! 

76 


Just make a cross in the relevant boxes to each question:


BAD NOT 
TOO 
OK GOOD VERY 
GOOD 
BAD 
PHYSICAL HEALTH 
I normally feel:In 
another three years my physical health will be:MENTAL 
HEALTH 
I normally feel:In 
another three years my mental health will be:RELATIONSHIP 
My love and sex life is:My 
relationship with my mother is (or was):My 
relationship with my father is (or was):My 
relationship with my classmates at school was:My 
relationship with my teachers was:My 
relationship with fellow workers is:My 
relationship with employers or those in authority is:In 
future I think that most of my relationships will be:ENVIRONMENT 
The area where I live is:The 
area where I work is:The 
area where I will live will be:The 
area where I will work will be:CAREER/
JOB SATISFACTION 
I think of the way I support myself is:I 
think of the way I will support myself will be:FINANCIAL 
POSITION 
My financial position is:During 
the past five years it has been:Over 
the next five years it will be:SUNDRY 
FACTORS 
God thinks I am:My 
moral standards are:Most 
people I just meet think I am:After 
they have got to know me think I am:My 
personality is:My 
looks are:My 
mother is:My 
father is:My 
friends are:My 
luck is:My 
common sense is:My 
performance as a parent is:My 
judgement of other people is:SUMMARY 
My life now is:In 
the past five years was:In 
the nest five years it will be:


77 


Now the purpose of asking you to do this is fairly obvious. I am trying 
to make you think a bit about you current condition. If you join the crosses 
together you will probably get a wavy line. Hopefully you won’t have a straight 
line on the far left and you probably won’t have a straight line going down on 
the far right, although that would be nice. I want to give you some idea of 
where to concentrate your mind on improving certain areas in your life. 

Maybe you are not happy with your relationship. Perhaps you don’t like 
your current state of your health, you might smoke or drink too much. It is 
possible you find it hard to make ends meet and need to earn more money. 
Perhaps you wish to retire in a few years time. There are so many areas to 
think of and only you can make these observations and decide what is really 
important to you. 

Now I want you to know that it is perfectly possible to push that wavy 
line much further to the right. There is virtually no area in life that cannot be 
improved if you want to. In fact it is relatively easy if you know how. 

It might be that there are many areas which are bothering you and you 
don’t know where to start Don’t worry we will take this in easy stages. 

Do you remember back in part two I set out a number of questions for 
you to think about. Now the time to go back over them and read what you 
wrote down. If you haven’t got them don’t worry I have set them out again for 
you below. If you didn’t fill them in before please do it now. 

1. What five things do you value most in your life? What five things would 
you strive for or make sacrifices for? 

a)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

b)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

c)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

d)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

e)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

2. In no more than thirty (30) seconds write down the three most important 
78 


goals in your life right now? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 

3. What would you do if you won £1,000,000 tomorrow? What things would 
you buy? What debts would you pay off? What places would you travel to? 
………………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………………. 
………………………………………………………………………………………. 

4. What would you do if you had no mental or physical limitations placed on 
you. By this I don’t mean would you fly like a bird or would you like to turn into 
a horse and win the Grand National! What I mean is what do you dream of 
doing or aspire to do but thus far have been afraid to try? 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 

………………………………………………………………………………………… 

…………………………………………………………………………………………. 

5. What would you do if you were told you only had six months to live? That is 
to say if you had six months to live in perfect health what you do, what would 
you change, how would you spend your time? 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 

6. What have you always wanted to do but never had the opportunity, money, 
or courage to try? What have you held back from trying? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 

7. What things or actions on your part give you the greatest feeling of self 
worth, recognition, or importance. 
79 


………………………………………………………………………………………. 

………………………………………………………………………………………. 

………………………………………………………………………………………. 

8. Imagine you have just found an old bottle on the beach and you uncork it 
and a Genie rushed out granting you just one wish? What one thing would you 
ask for if anything could be granted. ( Don’t write down you would wish to be 
twelve again or swept back to the time of Henry the eighth. Don’t limit yourself 
but use a little common-sense too.) What one thing would you do what one 
ambition would you realise if you knew you could not fail? 
……………………………………………………………………………………….. 

……………………………………………………………………………………….. 

What these questions do is really focus you mind on what really 
matters to you. The answers you give will be quite revealing and inspirational. 
After all you have no limits here. What I want you to do now is compare these 
answers with the earlier questionnaire. And see if there are any areas that 
coincide or cross over. You should by now have a better idea of what you 
would like change or improve on. 

You should start to recognise what really motivates or excites you. It is 
in these areas that you should concentrate on because real change will 
happen in these areas more rapidly. You will find it easier to keep your mind 
focused. 

If you felt your financial situation was in a bad shape and you wanted to 
improve it your answer to question three, “What would you do if you won 
£1,000, 000 tomorrow? What things would you buy? What debts would 
you pay off? What places would you travel to ?“ could be very revealing. 

PLEASE KNOW THAT BELOW ARE JUST A FEW OF THE 
THINGS YOU CAN GET IF YOU FOLLOW THE SIMPLE STEPS 
SHOWN IN THIS COURSE:


