The Lord of the Rings is a high fantasy epic written by philologist and University of Oxford professor J. R. R. Tolkien. The story began as a sequel to Tolkien's earlier, less complex children's fantasy novel The Hobbit (1937), but eventually developed into a much larger work. It was written in stages between 1937 and 1949, much of it during the Second World War.[1] It is the second best-selling novel ever written, with over 150 million copies sold.[2]

Although known to most readers as a trilogy, the work was initially intended by Tolkien to be one volume split into three sections. However, when Tolkien submitted the first volume entitled The Lord of the Rings to his publisher, it was decided for economic reasons to publish the work as three separate volumes, each consisting of two books, over the course of a year in 1954–55, creating the now familiar Lord of the Rings trilogy.[3][4] The three volumes were entitled The Fellowship of the Ring, The Two Towers, and The Return of the King. Structurally, the volumes are divided internally into six books, two per volume, with several appendices of background material, much abbreviated from Tolkien's originals, included at the end of the third volume. The Lord of the Rings has since been reprinted numerous times and translated into many languages, becoming one of the most popular and influential works in the field of 20th-century fantasy literature and the subject of several films.

The title of the novel refers to the story's main antagonist, the Dark Lord Sauron, who had in an earlier age created the One Ring to rule the other Rings of Power as the ultimate weapon in his campaign to conquer and rule all of Middle-earth. From quiet beginnings in the Shire, a Hobbit land not unlike the English countryside, the story ranges across north-west Middle-earth, following the course of the War of the Ring through the eyes of its characters, notably the Hobbits Frodo Baggins, Samwise "Sam" Gamgee, Meriadoc "Merry" Brandybuck and Peregrin "Pippin" Took, but also the Hobbits' chief allies and travelling companions: Aragorn, a Human Ranger, Boromir, a Human nobleman, Gimli, a Dwarf warrior, Legolas, an Elven prince, and Gandalf, a Wizard.

Tolkien's work has been the subject of extensive analysis of its themes and origins. Although a major work in itself, the story was only the last movement of a larger epic Tolkien had worked on since 1917, in a process he described as mythopoeia.[5] Influences on this earlier work, and on the story of The Lord of the Rings, include philology, mythology, religion and the author's distaste for the effects of industrialization, as well as earlier fantasy works and Tolkien's experiences in World War I.[1] The Lord of the Rings in its turn is considered to have had a great effect on modern fantasy; the impact of Tolkien's works is such that the use of the words "Tolkienian" and "Tolkienesque" has been recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary.[6]

The enduring popularity of The Lord of the Rings has led to numerous references in popular culture, the founding of many societies by fans of Tolkien's works,[7] and the publication of many books about Tolkien and his works. The Lord of the Rings has inspired, and continues to inspire, artwork, music, films and television, video games, and subsequent literature. Award-winning adaptations of The Lord of the Rings have been made for radio, theatre, 
The story takes place in the context of historical events in North-West Middle-earth. Long before the start of the novel the Dark Lord Sauron forges the One Ring in the year 1600 of the Second Age to gain power over other rings held by the leaders of Men, Elves and Dwarves. He is defeated in battle in the year 3434 of the Second Age, and Isildur, son of Elendil cuts off the One Ring and claims it as an heirloom for his line. Isildur is later killed by Orcs, and the Ring is lost in the river Anduin. Over two thousand years later, the Ring comes into the hands of the hobbit Déagol, who is then strangled to death by his cousin Sméagol, who takes the ring, is banished from his community, and hides under the Misty Mountains, where the Ring transforms him over the course of hundreds of years into a twisted, corrupted creature called Gollum. Eventually he loses the Ring which, as recounted in The Hobbit, is found by Bilbo Baggins. Meanwhile Sauron takes a new physical form and reoccupies his old realm of Mordor. Gollum sets out in search of the Ring, but is captured by Sauron, who learns from him that Bilbo Baggins now has it. Gollum is set loose and Sauron, who needs the Ring to regain his full power, sends forth the Ringwraiths, his dark, fearsome servants, to seize it.

The novel begins in the Shire, as Frodo Baggins inherits the Ring from Bilbo, his cousin and guardian. Both are unaware of its origin, but Gandalf the Grey, a wizard and old friend of Bilbo, learns of the Ring's history and advises Frodo to take it away from the Shire. Frodo leaves, taking his gardener and friend, Samwise ("Sam") Gamgee, and two cousins, Meriadoc ("Merry") Brandybuck and Peregrin ("Pippin") Took, as companions. They nearly encounter the Ringwraiths while still in the Shire, but shake off pursuit by cutting through the Old Forest, where they are aided by the enigmatic and powerful Tom Bombadil, upon whom the Ring has no effect. After leaving the Forest, they stop in the town of Bree, where they meet Aragorn, Isildur's heir, who joins them as guide and protector. They leave Bree after narrowly escaping another attack by the Ringwraiths, but the Ringwraiths follow them to the look-out hill of Weathertop and wound Frodo with an accursed knife. Aragorn leads the hobbits toward the Elven refuge of Rivendell, while Frodo gradually succumbs to the wound. At the Ford of Bruinen, the Ringwraiths attack again, but flood waters controlled by Elrond, master of Rivendell, rise up and overwhelm them, saving the company.

Frodo recovers in Rivendell under the care of Elrond. The Council of Elrond reveals much significant history about Sauron and the Ring, as well as the news that Sauron has corrupted the powerful wizard and previous ally Saruman. The Council decides that the threat of Sauron is too great to ignore and that the best course of action is to destroy the Ring by returning it to Mount Doom in Mordor, where it was forged. Frodo volunteers to take the Ring, and a "Fellowship of the Ring" is chosen to accompany and protect him: Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gandalf, Gimli the Dwarf, Legolas the Elf, and the man Boromir, son of the Ruling Steward Denethor of the realm of Gondor.

After failing to cross the Misty Mountains via the pass below Caradhras, the company pass through the Mines of Moria, where they are attacked by Orcs & The Watcher in the Water. Gandalf falls while fighting the ancient and terrible Balrog, allowing the others to escape. The remaining company take refuge in the Elven forest of Lothlórien. With boats and gifts from the Lady Galadriel, the company then travel down the River Anduin to the hill of Amon Hen. There Boromir succumbs to the lure of the Ring and attempts to take it from Frodo, who breaks from the Fellowship to continue the quest to Mordor alone, though Sam insists on coming to assist and protect him.

Meanwhile, orcs sent by Sauron and Saruman kill Boromir and kidnap Merry and Pippin. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas pursue the orcs into the kingdom of Rohan. The orcs are slain in a surprise attack by the Rohirrim, and Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn forest, where they are befriended by the tree-like Ents. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn, but find not the hobbits but Gandalf, resurrected after his battle with the Balrog and reborn as the significantly more powerful "Gandalf the White". Gandalf assures them that Merry and Pippin are safe, and they travel instead to rouse Théoden, King of Rohan, from a stupor of despair inflicted by Saruman, and to aid the Rohirrim in a stand against Saruman's armies. Théoden fortifies himself at the ancient fortress of Helm's Deep along with Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli, while Gandalf rides off to gather more soldiers. Helm's Deep is besieged by Saruman's orcs, but Gandalf arrives with reinforcements, and the orcs are defeated.

Meanwhile the Ents, roused to action from their customarily peaceful ways by Merry and Pippin, attack Isengard, trapping Saruman in the tower of Orthanc. Gandalf, Théoden and the others arrive at Isengard to confront Saruman. Saruman refuses to acknowledge the error of his ways, and Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers. Merry and Pippin rejoin the others and Pippin looks into a palantír, a seeing-stone that Saruman had used to communicate with Sauron. This unknowingly leads Sauron to think that Saruman has captured the Ring-bearer, so for his protection Gandalf takes Pippin to the kingdom of Gondor.

On their way to Mordor, Frodo and Sam capture Gollum, who has been following them from Moria, and force him to guide them to Mordor. Finding Mordor's main gate impassable, they travel instead toward a secret pass known to Gollum. Gollum betrays Frodo by leading him to the great spider Shelob in the tunnels of Cirith Ungol. Frodo is left seemingly dead by Shelob's bite, but Sam fights her off. Sam takes the Ring, and forces himself to leave Frodo, believing him dead. Orcs find Frodo's body and Sam overhears them say that Frodo is in fact not dead, but unconscious. Frodo is taken by the orcs to the tower of Cirith Ungol, and Sam determines to rescue him.

Sauron begins his military assault upon Gondor. Gandalf arrives with Pippin at the city of Minas Tirith in Gondor to alert Denethor of the impending attack. Minas Tirith is besieged, and Denethor, under the influence of Sauron through another palantír, loses hope and commits suicide. Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli come to Gondor by the Paths of the Dead, where Aragorn raises an undead army of oath-breakers in fulfillment of an old prophecy. The ghostly army help them to defeat the Corsairs of Umbar invading southern Gondor, and the forces now freed from the south, along with Rohan's cavalry, rally to help break the siege at Minas Tirith.

Sam rescues Frodo from Cirith Ungol, and they journey through Mordor. The mental weight of the ring's corruptive influence weakens Frodo considerably as they near Mount Doom, but he is aided by Sam. Meanwhile, in order to give Sam and Frodo a chance to cross Mordor safely, Aragorn leads the remaining Gondorian and Rohirrim soldiers to march on the Black Gate of Mordor. In the climactic battle the vastly outnumbered alliance of Gondor and Rohan fight desperately against Sauron's armies, with the intent of diverting Sauron's attention from Mount Doom. At the edge of the Cracks of Doom, Frodo is unable to resist the Ring, and claims it for himself. Gollum suddenly reappears, struggles with Frodo for the Ring and bites off Frodo's finger, Ring and all. However in doing so he falls into the fire, taking the Ring with him, and the One Ring is thus destroyed. In the instant of its destruction, Sauron perishes, his armies begin to retreat, his tower crumbles into dust, the Ringwraiths disintegrate, and the War of the Ring finally ends. Aragorn is crowned Elessar, King of Arnor and Gondor, and marries his longtime love Arwen, the daughter of Elrond.

Unbeknownst to them, however, Saruman has escaped his captivity and enslaved the Shire. The four hobbits, upon returning to the Shire and discovering this, raise a rebellion and overthrow him. Saruman is killed by his former servant Gríma Wormtongue, who is in turn killed by Hobbit archers. The War of the Ring thus comes to its true end on Frodo's very doorstep. Merry and Pippin are acclaimed heroes, and Sam uses his gifts from Galadriel to restore the Shire and marry Rosie Cotton. Frodo, however, remains wounded in body and spirit after his difficult journey bearing the weight of the One Ring, and some years later, accompanied by Bilbo and Gandalf, sails from the Grey Havens west over the Sea to the Undying Lands to find peace. After Rosie's death, Sam gives his daughter the Red Book of Westmarch, containing the story and adventures of Bilbo, Frodo, Sam, Pippin and Merry. Sam is then said to have crossed west over the Sea, the last of the Ring-bearers, though his ultimate fate remains unknown.
In the Second Age, the Dark Lord Sauron attempts to conquer Middle-Earth using his One Ring. In battle against the Elves and Men, Prince Isildur severs Sauron's hand, separating him from the Ring's power and vanquishing his army. However, Sauron's "life force" is bound to the Ring, allowing him to survive while the Ring remains. Isildur, corrupted by the its power, refuses to destroy the Ring. When Isildur is killed by Orcs, the Ring is lost in a river for 2500 years. The Ring is found by Gollum, who possesses it for centuries until it is taken by the Hobbit Bilbo Baggins.

Sixty years later, Bilbo leaves the Ring to his nephew, Frodo Baggins. Upon learning that the Ring belonged to Sauron, the Wizard Gandalf the Grey warns Frodo that Sauron's forces will come for him. Gandalf catches Samwise Gamgee eavesdropping by a window and sends him with Frodo to leave the Shire. Gandalf rides to Isengard to meet with Saruman the White, who reveals that Sauron's Nazgûl have been sent to capture the Ring. Saruman prevents Gandalf warning Frodo, revealing himself to be in service to Sauron. Gandalf is imprisoned atop Saruman's tower. Saruman commands Sauron's Orcs to construct weapons of war and produce a new breed of Orc fighters; the Uruk-hai.

While traveling to Bree, Frodo and Sam are joined by Merry and Pippin. Frodo meets Aragorn who agrees to lead them to Rivendell. During the journey they are attacked by the Nazgûl. Aragorn fights off the creatures but Frodo is wounded by their morgul blade which will cause him to turn into a wraith if not attended to with the proper care. While chased by the Nazgûl, Frodo is taken by the elf Arwen to Rivendell, and healed by her father, Elrond. Arwen uses her magic to summon a surge of water that sweeps away the pursuing Nazgûl. Gandalf escapes Saruman's tower with the aid of an eagle and travels to Rivendell. Elrond calls a council of the races still loyal to Middle-Earth to decide what should be done with the Ring. It is revealed that the Ring can only be destroyed by exposing it to the fires of Mount Doom, where it was forged. Frodo volunteers to take the Ring to Mount Doom, accompanied by Samwise, Merry, Pippin, Gandalf, and Aragorn. They are joined by the Elf Legolas, the Dwarf Gimli and Boromir to form the Fellowship of the Ring
Three hours later we’d made no progress. Simon and Roger Ellis had taken it upon themselves to search
the Forest, while Lydia and Gran took the Major’s borrowed motorcar and went to search Wych Gate
Church. Margaret and Henry were waiting at the house to coordinate the search.
By the time I had come back to the village of Wych Gate with the rector, Mr. Smyth, driving, Mrs. Ellis was
just leaving the police station there. She appeared to be dazed as Inspector Rother put her into his
motorcar. But she looked up as we pulled in front of the Inspector’s vehicle.
“What is it?” she asked.
“Sophie is missing,” I told her. Turning to Inspector Rother, I asked, “Any news?”
Mrs. Ellis, collecting herself, asked, “Are you sure you looked everywhere? The kitchen, the attics, the
public rooms? Was it Lydia? Surely—”
“She says she didn’t. I believe her. But who could have done this?” Desperate, I asked the Inspector, “Is
there any family in the Forest by the name of Halloran?”
“It’s not a local name,” he replied. “Why?”
“There isn’t time to explain,” I told him. “But if I’m right, if we find Sophie, we’ll have your murderer as well.”
“That’s what Ellis told me. Grasping at straws, that’s all it is. But I promised to help, and I’ll keep my word.”
Mrs. Ellis asked to come with us, and I decided that even as tired as she was, she would worry less if she
were with us.
Rother drove away in the direction of Hartfield. Mrs. Ellis said, “Quickly. Where have you looked?”
I told her, and she nodded. At the rector’s suggestion we decided to stop at the churchyard, and we
searched that again, torches flashing in every direction, then the church itself, and Mr. Smyth even went up
into the tower. I walked partway down the path to the little stream, and then turned back.
If Sophie lay at the bottom of the path, I didn’t want to know.
And then we went back to Hartfield. It had occurred to me that we’d seen Willy in the street there, Simon
and I, before the search had begun in earnest. If he’d taken Sophie, she had to be somewhere in the village.
It took me a quarter of an hour to find the man who called himself Willy.
He was squatting by a horse trough, washing a pair of gloves, his hands red from the cold water, a frown
between his eyes as he concentrated on what he was doing.
When I approached, he stood up and faced me. For an instant I had the urge to back away. There was
something about him that was repellent. But I stood my ground and said, “I’ve come to ask you if you saw
anyone with a little girl—about two years of age, very fair. She was in the hotel until earlier in the evening.
We don’t know if she wandered away or if she was taken away.”
He stared at me, and at first I wondered if he’d even understood my questions.
Then he said, “I don’t want any trouble with the police.”
“They won’t trouble you. Just tell me what you saw.”
“I didn’t see anything. I’ve already had trouble with the police over the watch. I’m afraid of them.”
“But you must tell me—if the little girl will be harmed, I need to know. I need to find her.”
“The police are already looking.” He gestured toward the inn. I could see that Simon had just returned and
was getting out of his motorcar, crossing to speak to the rector and Mrs. Ellis. “But it won’t do any good, will
it?”
“Please, Albert. Try to remember. Were you near the inn earlier in the evening?”
But he shook his head and turned to wring out the tattered gloves and hang them over a nearby bush. A
cold wind was starting up, and he shivered. “My name isn’t Albert,” he said with an odd dignity. He started to
walk on, his bare hands buried in the armpits of his coat.
“I’m sorry. Willy. I’ll buy you a new pair of gloves,” I said. “If you will try to remember.”
That got his attention and he turned around. “Will the police take the gloves away as they did the watch?”
he asked. “He said it was mine to keep. Always.”
“Who said?” I asked. “And why won’t it do any good for the police to look?”
He ignored my questions. “Will they take the gloves?” he pressed.
“No. The gloves will be yours.”
“For always?” That sly look was there again. This time I recognized it for what it was, the craftiness of a
man who had lived by his wits for so long he was forever looking to find an advantage. Someone who would
give him coins, as Davis Merrit had done, who would promise him a watch in return for a lie, or offer him a
pair of gloves in return for the truth. His only loyalty was to opportunity.
“For always,” I promised.
He considered the bribe and finally said, “My hands are cold. Bring me the gloves, and I’ll tell you what I
saw.”
There was a dry goods shop near the greengrocer’s. They were just closing, but I went in to look at men’s
gloves, resenting the wasted time. But it was necessary, and I waited my turn with the clerk, counting the
seconds as she finished wrapping a scarf for the woman ahead of me, assuring her that it was pure Welsh
wool and would last a lifetime.
I bought the gloves and asked that a scarf be added to my purchase, then hurried back to the street to
find Willy.
But he’d vanished, just as Sophie had done.
Chapter.
I hurried back toward the inn with my purchases and met Simon coming to find me.
“No one seems to know the name Halloran. He’s changed it. He must have done.”
I told him about my conversation with Willy. “He knows something. He must. He wanders through the
village at will, and people are so accustomed to seeing him that they almost overlook him. Or else he’s our
killer.”
“Keep looking. I’ll go with you. Mrs. Ellis is exhausted. I asked the rector to take her home with him.”
“He’s been so clever thus far, Simon. Why take Sophie? What earthly good will it do him?”
“Something frightened him. And there was no time to plan.”
The rector’s motorcar was passing us, on the way to the Rectory. I smiled at Mrs. Ellis and waved.
“Simon. Remember the night when Willy came into the inn yard to inspect your motorcar?”
“I do.”
“You’re Army. One has only to look at you. Is that why Willy was anxious to find out about you? Was he
once Army too?”
“There’s Margaret’s husband. And that Major of yours.”
“Henry is artillery. So, come to think of it, was the Major. And he isn’t mine.”
Just ahead of me I could see Constable Bates coming out of the inn. I called to him and hurried to catch
him up.
“We’re looking for Willy, Constable. Have you seen him?”
“I have not, Sister. Is it important? I’ll carry a message for you.”
“Just tell him that I need urgently to speak to him. Thank you, Constable.”
As he walked off, I said, “Did you search everywhere, Simon?”
“As well as I could. Ellis told me what to look for.”
We began again, knocking on every door, taking people from their dinners, rattling the doors of closed
shops until someone came to let us in.
No one had seen Willy.
“Where does he sleep?” I asked.
But no one knew.
When anyone asked, I told them I’d bought gloves and a scarf for him.
“You’ll spoil him,” the baker’s wife told me flatly. “I don’t hold with beggars.”
Willy’s wet gloves were still dripping on the bush where he’d hung them. He hadn’t come for them when
my back was turned.
When we asked the stationer where Willy slept, he replied, “In the old livery stable, that’s now a garage.
There’s a shed out back he’s allowed to use. Keeps him out of doorways. Not good for business, having to
step over a beggar on the stoop.”
The livery stable cum garage was close by the railway station, where the carriage was kept. I thanked him
as Simon touched my arm and said, “We’ll drive. It saves time.”
His motorcar was still in the inn yard. In the glow of the headlamps as we drove to the station, I saw a hare
zigzagging across in front of us before darting into the dry brush at the side of the road.
A little farther on, Constable Bates was coming toward us, and Simon pulled over. “Any word?” he asked.
“No, sir. I was just coming from the station. He sometimes sleeps in the ticket office.”
And we went on our way, the livery stable already clear in our headlamps. As we neared, I could hear the
stamp of horses’ hooves, and once the sound of one blowing. Simon and I left the motorcar ticking over and
went around back to where the shed stood at the end of the yard, ramshackle and bare of paint, the boards
a silvery gray in Simon’s torchlight. The door hinges were rusty and squeaked loudly as he dragged the
door open.
I shone the torch into the black interior, glad of the shelter of the door as the wind blew hard across the
bare fields beyond.
The shed was barely large enough to hold the battered old mattress on the floor. A peg for clothing was
on one side, and on the other, a spirit lamp for making tea. A tin stood on the shelf above, and a cracked jar
that held a little honey.
And it was only marginally warmer than the outside. I shivered at the thought of living here through the
winter.
“No wonder the man begs,” I said.
Shutting the door again, we turned back toward the motorcar. In the darkness I tripped over something
underfoot, nearly sprawling on my face in the torn grass of the yard.
Simon put his torch on whatever it was, saying, “Careful. These old stables are a minefield. Horseshoes,
wire—” He broke off as the light caught the side of a torn shoe, and then came back again to pin it squarely
in its beam.
“Willy was wearing that shoe when I met him. Just over an hour ago.”
“No one said anything about the man sleeping in the railway station. Except Constable Bates.”
He flashed the light around, but there were no other signs that anyone had been here before us. Then he
walked to the barn where the carriage horses were kept, shifting the door to walk inside. “Stay here,” he
said to me, and I stopped in the doorway. He disappeared for a minute or more, then came back to where I
was standing. “One of the horses is sweating. Someone rode him recently.”
“And there’s no train at this hour of the night.” I could just see his face in the faint light of the stars as we
made our way back to the motorcar. “What’s more, I don’t remember the carriage in Hartfield. Not tonight.”
“No. But there must be a way to reach the heath without going through the village, if you are leading a
horse. I think we’ve found our killer.”
“Constable Bates?” I felt a surge of relief that it wasn’t anyone from Vixen Hill. “Do you think he’s Sergeant
Halloran? Yes, it would explain— Simon, I told him I was searching for Willy. I’m responsible.”
“You had no way of guessing.”
As we drove back to Hartfield, I said, “It was Constable Bates who found the tracks where George
Hughes and Davis Merrit met and then walked on together. Inspector Rother praised him for that bit of
excellent police work. But he must have been following Merrit and saw them together. He was already
suspicious of Merrit, surely. Who did he kill first, do you think? George or Davis Merrit?”
“Merrit. Before he could ride back to Hartfield. And then Hughes.”
“Yes, of course. He could have hidden Merrit’s body until George was dead, then arranged his supposed
suicide. Simon, he was right under our noses. At the heart of the inquiry. Able to cover his tracks. But why
take Sophie? I can understand about Willy. I’d wanted to question him, and that was too dangerous. Men
like Willy can remember, sometimes.”
We had reached Hartfield, and I scanned every face, searching for Constable Bates. Instead I saw Roger
Ellis, just pulling into the inn yard as we came up. In the glare from his headlamps, his face looked haggard.
“Anything?” he asked, hailing us as we slowed.
I said quickly, “We’ve been searching for Willy. He’s missing— I think we’ve just found his shoe.” I was
about to add that we feared that Constable Bates was involved, but for some reason I stopped myself. This
was hardly the place. . . .
“Good God—why Willy?”
“It’s possible he saw who took Sophie.”
Just then Lydia and Gran drove up. Gran’s face told me that they’d had no more luck than Roger had. Her
usually stiff back was hunched with fatigue.
“Any news?” Lydia asked quickly. But I shook my head.
“Lydia, why don’t you take your grandmother home?” I asked. “Henry would be glad to take her place, I’m
sure.”
Gran protested, but Roger said to her, “No, really, you must rest a little.”
Lydia was saying, “I won’t stop searching.” Anxiety was plain in her voice. “And there’s the old mill. We
haven’t gotten there yet. And I must ask the hotel for the use of a blanket. I don’t know if whoever took
Sophie thought about wrapping her well.”
Roger hesitated, then said, “I’ll take Gran home. Lydia, go with Bess. I’ll bring Henry back with me.”
“I thought you were to look at the windmill?” Simon asked, turning to him.
Lydia said, “He asked me to. He was going to The Pitch. Where Davis Merrit’s body was found. But I
stopped at Vixen Hill for a blanket for Gran’s knees, and it wasn’t until we left there that Gran said we should
have taken another for Sophie.” She shivered. “They used to claim the mill was haunted. Some tragedy or
other, years ago. And it’s hardly more than a ruin. I thought it was a waste of time.”
Simon glanced at Roger. “Is that true?”
“True enough. I haven’t been there in three years.”
I said, “Still—it’s the only place we haven’t looked. Simon—we ought to hurry.”
Lydia said, “Wait for me!” Leaving the motorcar by the inn, she came quickly over to ours.
Roger, visibly torn between going with us and his concern for his grandmother, said, “I’ll follow as quickly
as I can.”
“Search the grounds at Vixen Hill. It’s where the doctor’s body was left,” Simon told him, and then we were
away, keeping to a steady pace through the rest of Hartfield, and then driving fast as we reached the heath,
holding the heavy motorcar on the track.
I said to Simon, “It’s possible we will find both of them there. If he’s hurt that child—!”
“I don’t know why he took her,” he said grimly. “He has nothing to gain by harming her.”
“Don’t even think it,” Lydia said from the rear seat, her voice frightened.
“Tell us where to find the turning,” I said to her over my shoulder. “I can’t be sure I’ll recognize it in the
dark.”
“And I don’t understand why anyone would want to harm Willy. He’s not very bright, and he muddles things.
Whoever is doing this must be mad.”
The motorcar rocked, as if shaken by a giant hand, then steadied as we bounced high over a deeper rut. I
could see sheep, ghostly white, staring at us as we passed, as if we were the ones who were mad.
“We think it must be Constable Bates.” I explained to her what had happened. “I’d made the mistake of
telling him that I was searching for Willy. Constable Bates must have gone to look for him straightaway.”
“But where is Willy now? Surely not the mill—how would Bates get him there?”
Simon told her about the horse. “And I saw him earlier, before all this began, driving the Inspector’s
motorcar.”
She leaned forward. “He’s the one who always frightened me. The one with the cold eyes. But he’s a
policeman. Why would he murder someone? I know, I know. The court-martial. Still, this man Halloran could
be someone else, quietly living in another part of the Forest.”
“There’s that,” Simon agreed, but I could tell he didn’t believe it.
“Has he lived here for very long? Does his family come from here?” I asked.
“I know almost nothing about him. Constable Austin could probably tell you more. I think something was
said about Constable Bates coming from Cornwall, but I don’t know if that’s true or not. At a guess, he’s
been here two years? I know Constable Freeman died of cancer the first year of the war, and it was hard to
find a replacement. Oh—there’s the turning!”
We nearly missed it. Simon stopped as quickly as he could, then reversed. I could see as the headlamps
swept it that our way was going to be much rougher here. A horse made sense.
About three miles down the track we were now traveling, I thought I could see the windmill ahead against
the night sky, blotting out the stars. The top was misshapen, as if it had rotted through, and the arms were
mere skeletons. I pointed it out to Simon.
“That’s it,” Lydia said, from just behind my shoulder. “I don’t think it’s been used since Roger’s
grandfather’s day. There’s a new mill on the road to Groombridge.”
Simon switched off the headlamps, pulling over to the edge of the track.
“We ought to walk from here,” he said quietly. “Sounds carry in the night.”
He got out, and I followed him, asking Lydia to wait in the motorcar.
“I’d rather come with you,” she said in a small voice, and I remembered that she had not cared for the
heath at night.
“You’ll be all right. Use the horn if anyone comes near you. Anyone. We dare not leave the motorcar
empty.”
“Yes, all right,” she said, climbing into the driver’s seat. I saw her rest her hand on the horn.
And then Simon and I were off across the heath. It was rough going, although the stark black shapes of
the wind-twisted heather and gorse were easy enough to see. It was the roots sprawling out between them
that caught at our feet. Simon had taken my hand to guide me, and together we made fairly good time.
The windmill grew larger. Bare of sails, it looked ominous against the night sky. The black weathered
wood looked as if it had come from the gorse under our feet.
“There must be an opening,” I said and nearly went flat on my face as the toe of my shoe snagged a root.
“The other side.”
We reached the mill, and it was easier going, a cleared space around it not yet swallowed up by the
heath. There was a window higher up, but I didn’t think anyone was there. Still, we were more easily spotted
than someone inside the shadowed interior.
“He’s not here.”
Simon leaned over to whisper against my hair. “Don’t be too sure. There must be another way in.”
Making our way silently around the rough wooden sides, we found a door. It was merely a blacker
rectangle, standing half open, as if it had been left that way so long ago that the door had petrified in that
position. A torch gave too much light. I reached into my pocket for matches, and pressed several into
Simon’s palm.
It was then I heard the whimpering, like a puppy left alone in the dark.
I would have dashed inside without thinking but for Simon’s hand clamping down on my shoulder. I winced
and stood still.
We waited, straining to hear the smallest sounds from inside. But there was nothing, not even the
scurrying of a rat.
Simon struck a match and held it just inside.
Shadows danced about the walls, but we could see very little. Part of the upper floor had come down, half
filling the ground floor.
“All right,” he said. “I’ll go first.” And lighting a second match, he stepped inside as quickly as if he were
entering the tent of a suspected tribesman. I tried to see around him, but he was blocking my view. A third
match, and then he said, “All clear. Watch out. There are timbers everywhere, and Willy’s body is just
beyond the door.”
“And Sophie?”
“She’s on the stone. I think she’s well enough. I could see eyes peering at me.”
He flicked on his torch, the light blinding both of us, and we had to stand still until our eyes adjusted to it.
As soon as I could pick out her shape, I walked over to Sophie. She opened her arms to me, and I picked
her up.
“I don’t like it,” she said to me in French. “Dark.”
“Yes, darling, we’ll have you out of here quickly. Simon, she’s all right. How is Willy?”
He was bending over the man. “There’s blood on the back of his head. But he’s still breathing.”
“There’s the scarf in the motorcar. I meant it for him. We can bind his head with that. But how do we get
him there?”
Simon was rummaging around now and discovered some sacks in a corner, but they were filthy and
rotting.
“Lydia can take Sophie, and then I’ll be free to help you.” I stepped outside and called to her.
She refused to come at first, then stepped down from the motorcar and whimpering almost in imitation of
Sophie, she made her way through the dark. When she finally reached me, she gripped my arm with
anxious fingers. “Why would anyone do this to a child? I find it hard to believe.” Taking Sophie from me, she
shivered as she looked down at Willy. “How did anyone manage to bring him here?”
“The station carriage horses, at a guess,” Simon answered her. “Or the motorcar.”
She started back the way she’d come, picking her footing carefully.
I watched until she reached the motorcar, and then went back to Simon. I found that he’d brought Willy
around. The man was sitting up, holding his head, moaning.
“Can you walk, if we help you?” Simon asked him.
“Dizzy,” Willy said. “Sick.”
Shining Simon’s torch on the back of Willy’s head, I could see bone shining through the bloody tear in his
scalp, pinkish white in the light.
“Gently. His skull may be fractured,” I warned Simon, and then bent to take Willy’s arm. “Will you try?” I
asked him.
He smelled. And I wondered if there might be lice in the folds of his clothing as we supported him
between us.
It took us nearly ten minutes to persuade him that he could walk. Even so, he gagged twice as we got him
to his feet.
“Close your eyes,” I told him. “Let us guide you.”
And so we got him moving, slowly taking him through the gorse, stumbling and begging us to stop, once
falling to his knees and refusing to stand again.
When we reached the motorcar, he put out a hand to touch it, as if uncertain that it was really there. Then
he half stepped, half relapsed into the rear seat.
Five minutes later, we were on our way back to Hartfield.
I was questioning Willy, but he couldn’t remember being attacked or who had taken him to the mill.
Groaning, he held his head in his hands, motion sick from the blow.
In the seat next to Simon, Lydia was asking Sophie what had happened to her, but all she would say was
that the man had told her he had a cat.
I said to Simon, “How are we to prove any of this?”
“I’ll call London straightaway and get someone down here. Meanwhile, the doctor is dead. Someone
ought to take Willy to the one you mentioned from Groombridge.”
I could see that Willy’s wound was bleeding profusely, already soaking through the wool scarf I’d used to
bandage it.
When we came to the turning, Simon suggested taking Lydia and the child to Vixen Hill, where Margaret
and Henry were waiting for news. “She’ll be safe there.”
We did that, making certain that Henry and his wife knew what to expect, and then Willy, Simon, and I
headed toward Hartfield.
We stopped at the Rectory, and Mr. Smyth agreed to convey Willy to Groombridge, and his sister went
with him. Mrs. Ellis had fallen into a restless sleep, and I agreed to sit with her. We managed to move Willy
to the Smyth motorcar, and then Simon and I were alone, standing there in the windy High Street.
“I must put in a call to London,” he said. “They’ll send someone.”
And he was gone. I stood there in the darkness, feeling the weight of exhaustion overwhelming me.
Where was Constable Bates?
Ten minutes later, Simon came back out to where I was waiting. “Bates was Halloran’s mother’s name.
Her nephew, one Thomas Bates, was a constable in Cornwall before the war. Apparently he was among the
missing on the Somme. Halloran must have assumed his identity, claiming a medical discharge. I expect no
one here in Sussex doubted his credentials. If he conducted himself properly, there would be no reason to
question them.”
“And who would look for a deserter in a village constable? The police are so shorthanded, thanks to the
war. I remember Inspector Herbert complaining about that in London.”
“At any rate, the Army is sending men posthaste to help us find him and take him in charge.”
I went back to the Rectory and found Mrs. Ellis awake and in the parlor, looking for the rector or his sister.
“What’s happened?” she asked, her face white with fear. “Don’t keep it from me!”
I took her into the kitchen and set about making tea, all the while giving her a brief account of what we had
discovered.
“Oh, thank God,” she said when I’d finished. “I thought the rector might have gone because—because
someone was dead.” After a moment, she went on. “You don’t know—I thought—I thought God was
punishing me. Taking her from me a second time. I didn’t want her to pay for my sins.” Then, without
warning, she began to cry.
“She’s safe, Mrs. Ellis,” I said. “And no harm came to her. She was a little frightened in the dark, but that
was all. There’s nothing to fear.”
“I killed them, you know.” She raised her head to look at me. Tears were streaming down her face. “And
when I saw Sophie, I thought God had forgiven me. But he hadn’t. I don’t deserve Sophie.”
I felt cold. “Killed whom?”
“Juliana. And then Alan. They were suffering so, and there was nothing to be done. I couldn’t watch it any
longer. The doctor had told me it would be a matter of hours. He gave me laudanum to help me through the
end. But I gave a little to Juliana, and she simply went to sleep. It was so quiet, so peaceful. I was so
grateful. And I asked for laudanum again when Alan was dying. And I helped him through the end. You’re a
nurse, have you never wished for something, anything, to end the pain of those in your charge?”
Swallowing my shock, I said, “It was wrong. You know that.”
“God forgive me, I do. That’s why I was willing to take the blame for the other deaths, I thought I could
make amends.”
What to do? Did I call the police and hand this woman over to them? She had lost her husband and
buried two children as well. Could it be proved that the amount of laudanum she gave her dying daughter
and her dying son had speeded up their deaths? Or changed the manner of their deaths? I wasn’t a doctor, I
didn’t know. Perhaps it only eased her to think so.
“Mrs. Ellis.”
“I know. I’ve told you. A nursing sister. I want a little peace, you see. I want to be punished, so that the rest
of my family will be safe. Please. Help me.”
“Your family needs you. I can’t give you absolution for what you did. Nor can I hold you accountable,
because I wasn’t there. I have only your word, not that of a doctor. You must make your peace in another
way. Perhaps Mr. Smyth can help you.”
She broke down again, too tired to stop the tears. And I did what I could to comfort her. When she was
quieter, I told her I must find Simon, to see if he or Roger had had any success explaining the situation to
Inspector Rother.
“Yes, go see to it,” she said, taking my hand for a moment. “Thank you, Bess.”
I knelt by her chair. “You won’t do anything foolish?”
“No. Sadly, I don’t have the courage. But I think it helped to confess. I’ve held it in so long.”
I left her there to finish her tea, the pot beside her, and walked back to the hotel.
The first person I saw as I came through the door into Reception was Constable Bates. He was walking
down the main stairs, as if he were coming from one of the rooms on the floor above. It was an ideal place
to stay out of sight, with windows overlooking the street.
My first thought was, Where is Simon? He’d been here when I left only half an hour ago.
Chapter

The Fellowship set out but are hindered by Saruman's magic. They travel through the dwarf Mines of Moria. Inside they find that Orcs have overrun the mines and slain the Dwarfs. The Fellowship is attacked by the Orcs and a Balrog, an ancient demon of fire and shadow. Gandalf confronts the Balrog, allowing the others to escape, but both Gandalf and the Balrog fall into an abyss. Mourning Gandalf's loss, the group flees to Lothlórien, where they are sheltered by its rulers, Galadriel and Celeborn. That night, Frodo meets Galadriel, who informs Frodo that it is his destiny to destroy the Ring. The Fellowship continue their journey. Meanwhile, Saruman assembles a force of Uruk-hai, led by Lurtz, to hunt the Fellowship.

After arriving at Parth Galen, Boromir, driven mad by the Ring's corruption, tries to take the Ring from Frodo, believing that it is the only way to save his realm. Frodo manages to escape by putting the Ring on his finger, becoming invisible. Boromir realizes his mistakes and attempts to find Frodo. Frodo, heeding Galadriel's warning that the Ring will eventually corrupt the other members of the Fellowship, decides to continue his journey alone. Lurtz and his Uruk-hai arrive and Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli attempt to hold them off while Frodo escapes. Merry and Pippin lead the Uruks away from Frodo and are nearly killed before Boromir appears and intervenes. Lurtz shoots Boromir with an arrow. The Uruk-Hai capture Merry and Pippin. Aragorn arrives and kills Lurtz before he can finish Boromir. Aragorn tends to a dying Boromir, and promises him that the world of men will not fall. Boromir dies with Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas by his side.

Samwise finds Frodo, who reluctantly lets Samwise join him. Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli set out to rescue Merry and Pippin. As Frodo and Sam gaze out at the land before them, they grieve over the others. Frodo says that he is glad that Sam is with him and the two hobbits set off towards Mordor.
Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, Gandalf, Théoden, Gamling and Éomer meet up with Merry, Pippin and Treebeard at Isengard. The group returns to Edoras, where Pippin looks into a recovered palantír which grants him a vision. While using the palantír, he is seen and mentally interrogated by Sauron. Pippin tells him nothing regarding Frodo and the Ring. From this event, Gandalf deduces that Sauron is planning to attack Minas Tirith. Gandalf rides with Pippin to find the steward Denethor. Pippin swears loyalty to Denethor, his son Boromir having saved his life at Amon Hen. Gandalf urges Denethor to call Rohan for aid, but Denethor declines, fearing Aragorn and Gandalf plan to depose him. The Morgul army, led by the Nazgûl, drive the Gondorians out of Osgiliath. Denethor sends his younger son Faramir on a suicide mission to reclaim the city. Pippin fires a beacon, signaling Théoden and Aragorn to assemble the Rohirrim for battle.

Elrond informs Aragorn that Arwen did not take the journey to the Undying Lands and is now dying. Believing their forces to be outnumbered by Sauron's, Elrond gives Aragorn the Andúril to acquire the service of the Army of the Dead, who owe allegiance to the Heir of Isildur. Éowyn confesses her love for Aragorn and asks him not to go but Aragorn reaffirms his love for Arwen. Accompanied by Legolas and Gimli, Aragorn ventures into the Paths of the Dead and gains the loyalty of the King of the Dead and his men by brandishing Andúril, proving himself the Heir of Isildur. At Dunharrow, Théoden rides off to war with over 6,000 Riders, unaware Éowyn and Merry have secretly joined his forces.

Sauron's armies lay siege to Minas Tirith with the Witch-king and his Nazgûl. Denethor attempts to burn Faramir and himself alive but Faramir is saved by Gandalf and Pippin. Denethor commits suicide. Theoden's Rohirrim army appears, charging into the Orc armies and pushing them to the verge of defeat. However, the Haradrim arrive and join the Orc army, turning the tide of battle. The Witch-king kills Theoden but is killed by Eowyn with Merry's help. On the verge of defeat, the Rohirrim are saved when Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli arrive with the Army of the Dead. Aragorn and Gimli kill the Orc-leader Gothmog. The Army of the Dead decimate Sauron's forces, ending the Battle. Aragorn frees the Army of the Dead and their souls go to the afterlife.

Meanwhile, Frodo Baggins, Samwise Gamgee and Gollum travel to Minas Morgul to destroy the Ring. Sam overhears Gollum's plans to murder them and take the Ring for himself. To remove Sam as an obstacle, Gollum persuades Frodo that Sam wants the Ring for himself, and Frodo angrily tells Sam to go home. Sam leaves but, realizing Gollum's treachery, seeks out Frodo. Gollum betrays Frodo, leaving him in the lair of the giant spider, Shelob. Shelob paralyzes Frodo, but Sam manages to save him. An Orc battalion captures Frodo and take him to a nearby tower. Sam rescues Frodo from the tower, and they continue the journey to Mount Doom.

Aragorn leads his remaining men to the Black Gate, distracting Sauron and his forces and allowing Sam and Frodo to enter Mount Doom. Sam carries the weakened Frodo up Mount Doom but Gollum appears and attacks them. At the Crack of Doom, Frodo succumbs to the Ring's power, refusing to destroy it. Gollum bites off Frodo's finger, seizing the Ring for himself. Frodo attacks Gollum to reclaim it but they both fall over the edge. Frodo clings to the ledge but Gollum and the Ring fall into the lava. The Ring destroyed, Sauron is defeated and the destruction of his form creates an immense shockwave that kills most of the Orcs. The remaining Orcs perish as Mordor is wrecked by intense earthquakes, leaving Aragorn's men unharmed.

Left stranded by rising lava, Samwise and Frodo are saved by Gandalf, carried to safety on Eagles. In the aftermath, Aragorn is crowned King, heralding a new age of peace, and is reunited with Arwen. The four Hobbits return home to the Shire, where Sam marries his childhood sweetheart, Rosie Cotton. Frodo leaves Middle-earth for the Undying Lands with Gandalf, Bilbo, Elrond, Celeborn and Galadriel, leaving his account of the story to Sam.
Gandalf the Grey gives his life in battle against the Balrog, giving the Fellowship of the Ring time to escape. Weeks later, Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee continue their journey to Mordor to destroy the Ring. At night they are attacked by Gollum who seeks the Ring for himself. Frodo and Samwise capture Gollum, but Frodo takes pity on him, understanding the burden of the ring. Requiring a guide, Frodo persuades Gollum to lead them to Mordor. In Rohan, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli pursue the Uruk-hai who have taken Merry and Pippin prisoner. Meanwhile, King Théoden has been entranced by Gríma Wormtongue, who is secretly in the service of Saruman. Incited by Saruman, Orcs and Wild Men of Dunland, lay siege to the lands. Éomer accused Gríma of being a spy and is banished for undermining him. Éomer sets forth to the countryside to gather the remaining loyal men of the Rohirrim. Éomer's army later ambush and kill the Uruk-hai holding Merry and Pippin. Merry and Pippin flee into the forest and meet Treebeard, the oldest of the Ents.

Frodo, Samwise and Gollum traverse the Dead Marshes, evading a Nazgûl. Upon reaching the Black Gate they find it closed and guarded by Orcs. Gollum convinces the pair that attempting to enter the gate will lead to their capture, offering instead to lead them to an unguarded entrance. Samwise is suspicious of Gollum's intentions. After being informed by Éomer of his ambush against the Uruk-hai, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli finds Merry and Pippin's trail. The trio are confronted by Gandalf, reborn as Gandalf the White after dying in battle. Gandalf joins with the trio as they journey to Edoras. After arriving, they free Théoden from Gríma's spell. Théoden decides to move his people to the stronghold Helm's Deep for safety. Fearing Helm's Deep will not survive, Gandalf leaves to find Éomer and his forces. Gríma flees to Orthanc and informs Saruman of a weakness in the outer wall of Helm's Deep. Saruman dispatches his army to the stronghold.

Meanwhile, Gollum struggles with his loyalty to Frodo and his desire for the Ring. Samwise and Frodo are captured by Rangers of Ithilien. As Théoden's forces travel to Helm's Deep, they are attacked by Saruman's Warg riders and Aragorn is thrown from a cliff and believed to be dead. In Rivendell, Elrond convinces Arwen to abandon her love for Aragorn and leave the lands for safety. Frodo and Samwise are taken to Ranger's leader, Faramir. To prevent Gollum being killed by Faramir's hunters, Frodo reveals Gollum's presence and the creature is captured. Learning of Frodo's Ring, Faramir orders that it be sent to Gondor. In Rohan, Aragorn washes up on a river bank and makes his way to Helm's deep. In Fangorn forest, Merry, Pippin, Treebeard and other Ents hold a council to decide on the role of the Ents in the war with Saruman.

The battle of Helm's Deep begins between the Uruk-Hai and Rohirrim with Aragorn and his companions. Explosives are used against the weakness in the wall, allowing the Uruks to breach the fortress. In Fangorn, Treebeard and the other Ents refuse to become involved in the war. Pippin takes Treebeard to a section of Fangorn decimated by Saruman. Seeing Saruman's treachery, Treebeard commands the Ents to seek vengeance. Aragorn leads Théoden, Legolas and the remaining Rohirrim to attack the Uruk-hai army, allowing the Rohirrim's women and children to escape into the mountains. Gandalf appears, accompanied by Éomer and his men. The combined forces cause the Uruk-hai to flee into Fangorn, where the Ents and their Huorn allies attack them. At Isengard, the Ents destroy the Uruk-hai and release the river dam, drowning the surviving Orc defenders and stranding Saruman in his tower.

In the East, Faramir has the hobbits taken to Osgiliath. Faramir's forces are attacked by Orcs led by a Nazgûl. With the aid of Sam and Faramir, Frodo escapes the Nazgûl's attempt to capture him and the Ring. The Ring attempts to make Frodo kill Sam but he resists. The Nazgûl is defeated and flees. Faramir frees the hobbits and sends them on their journey, joined by Gollum. Gandalf remarks that Sauron will seek retribution for his defeat, stating that hope now rests with Frodo and Sam. Feeling betrayed by Frodo for allowing him to be captured by Faramir, Gollum vows to reclaim the ring and kill Frodo and Sam.
The wedding for Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann is disrupted with the arrival of Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Co. who has warrants to arrest the two and the ex-Commodore James Norrington for helping Captain Jack Sparrow to evade his hanging. Elizabeth is imprisoned while Beckett negotiates with Will to locate Jack and retrieve his compass which has the ability to point in the direction of what a person most desires. At the same time, Jack Sparrow reveals to his crew on the Black Pearl that they are going to find a mysterious key. Jack is approached by a reincarnated Bootstrap Bill Turner, Will's long-deceased father, who reveals he is now part of the crew of The Flying Dutchman captained by Davy Jones, and Jack must pay his debt to him – Jack asking Jones to raise his ship from the depths and make him captain for thirteen years. In exchange, Jack must now serve aboard the Dutchman for 100 years. Bootstrap further tells Jack that Jones' beast, the Kraken, will be sent after him unless he pays  but Norrington is killed by a crazed Bootstrap Bill.
