
On April 1, 1980, the band recorded a show at the Steamboat 1874 club in Austin. The recordings were released posthumously in 1992 as In the Beginning.[41][43] At a pawn shop in Austin, Vaughan spotted a used Fender Stratocaster that cost $350, though he could not afford the guitar. According to his wife, she found seven people with $50 and purchased the guitar. Presented to him for his birthday at Steamboat Springs in Austin, the guitar was affectionately named "Lenny". The next year, after seeing the band at Rockefeller's in Houston, Tommy Shannon replaced Jackie Newhouse.[42] Vaughan also started using his full name, Stevie "Ray" Vaughan. Millikin proposed the idea of merging "Stevie Ray Vaughan" with "Double Trouble," and all band members agreed.[38]

In July 1981, the band played a festival at Manor Downs in Manor, Texas. A film from the performance was given to Rolling Stones frontman Mick Jagger by manager Chesley Millikin.[44] Millikin received a call from drummer Charlie Watts, arranging a private party in New York City at a club known as Danceteria. The band was booked to only play 35 minutes, though they ended up performing for over two hours.[21] With photos and an article about the occasion in Rolling Stone,[21] rumors spread that Vaughan and Double Trouble were going to sign with Rolling Stones Records. Jagger declined, however, saying that "the blues just doesn't sell."[42]
In early 1982, Vaughan and Double Trouble played a record release party for Lou Ann Barton at the Continental Club in Austin. Impressed by the band's performance, music producer Jerry Wexler recommended that they play the Montreux Jazz Festival in Switzerland, performing on July 17, 1982.[45][46] They were the first unsigned act to perform at the festival's Montreux Casino. The band borrowed $15,000 from Millikin to pay for travel expenses.[47] Backstage, the band ran into Larry Graham, bassist for Sly and the Family Stone. He asked them if they could play together during the encore of their performance, though this did not happen.[47] The lineup featured primarily acoustic acts, while Vaughan and Double Trouble went on stage highly amplified and several audience members started to boo.[47] After the show, Millikin booked the band in the bar at the Montreux Casino, jamming with musicians like Bob Glaub and Jackson Browne.[48] Browne offered them three free days at his Los Angeles studio. Unable to afford the expense, the band booked a small tour in venues across Texas. During Thanksgiving weekend, they traveled to Jackson Browne's studio and recorded a demo in two days.[49][50]

Vaughan received a call from pop star David Bowie, who had seen him at Montreux and wanted Vaughan to play on his next album Let's Dance. Bowie also asked Vaughan to be a part of his band on the Serious Moonlight Tour, commencing in Belgium. In March 1983, rehearsals for the tour took place in the Studios at Las Colinas.[51] Bowie grew irritated by Vaughan's wife Lenny and banned her from rehearsals. Bowie invited Vaughan and Double Trouble to be the tour's opening act.[52] Manager Chesley Millikin took advantage of the European appearances by booking the band on a German television program called Musikladen,[51] though Bowie ordered Millikin to cease managing Vaughan while on tour. In turn, Millikin demanded an increase in Vaughan's compensation, which was then reportedly $300–$400 per show.[51][53] The contract was allegedly reviewed by show business attorney Lee Eastman, who supposedly denied all knowledge of the agreement.[54] Vaughan eventually opted out of the tour.
In early 1982, Vaughan and Double Trouble played a record release party for Lou Ann Barton at the Continental Club in Austin. Impressed by the band's performance, music producer Jerry Wexler recommended that they play the Montreux Jazz Festival in Switzerland, performing on July 17, 1982.[45][46] They were the first unsigned act to perform at the festival's Montreux Casino. The band borrowed $15,000 from Millikin to pay for travel expenses.[47] Backstage, the band ran into Larry Graham, bassist for Sly and the Family Stone. He asked them if they could play together during the encore of their performance, though this did not happen.[47] The lineup featured primarily acoustic acts, while Vaughan and Double Trouble went on stage highly amplified and several audience members started to boo.[47] After the show, Millikin booked the band in the bar at the Montreux Casino, jamming with musicians like Bob Glaub and Jackson Browne.[48] Browne offered them three free days at his Los Angeles studio. Unable to afford the expense, the band booked a small tour in venues across Texas. During Thanksgiving weekend, they traveled to Jackson Browne's studio and recorded a demo in two days.[49][50]

Vaughan received a call from pop star David Bowie, who had seen him at Montreux and wanted Vaughan to play on his next album Let's Dance. Bowie also asked Vaughan to be a part of his band on the Serious Moonlight Tour, commencing in Belgium. In March 1983, rehearsals for the tour took place in the Studios at Las Colinas.[51] Bowie grew irritated by Vaughan's wife Lenny and banned her from rehearsals. Bowie invited Vaughan and Double Trouble to be the tour's opening act.[52] Manager Chesley Millikin took advantage of the European appearances by booking the band on a German television program called Musikladen,[51] though Bowie ordered Millikin to cease managing Vaughan while on tour. In turn, Millikin demanded an increase in Vaughan's compensation, which was then reportedly $300–$400 per show.[51][53] The contract was allegedly reviewed by show business attorney Lee Eastman, who supposedly denied all knowledge of the agreement.[54] Vaughan eventually opted out of the tour.
In January 1984, Vaughan and Double Trouble started recording a new album at the Power Station,[66] staying at the Mayflower Hotel in New York City.[63] Within an hour of setting up their equipment, recording engineer Richard Mullen asked the band to "play something for peak-reading".[67] With tape rolling, they played a blues cover named "Tin Pan Alley". When the song was finished, Hammond said into the talkback microphone, "That's the best you'll ever get that song. That sounded wonderful".[67] After more takes drummer Chris Layton recalls that it "never sounded better than that".[68] After completing the recordings, the band performed at Volunteer Jam X, a concert first organized by the Charlie Daniels Band in 1974.[69] Vaughan appeared with musician George Thorogood at the 26th Grammy Awards to present Chuck Berry with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.

Released on May 15, 1984, Couldn't Stand the Weather charted at 31.[70] A cover of Jimi Hendrix's "Voodoo Child (Slight Return)" was included on the album and became a concert favorite.[65] Music videos were made for "Couldn't Stand the Weather" and "Cold Shot".[71] The "Couldn't Stand the Weather" music video used industrial fans with large amounts of water, combining live action with stock footage of a violent hurricane.[71] The "Cold Shot" music video featured actress Margaret Wiley, who was part of a comedy troupe at Esther's Follies theatre in Austin.[72] Both videos received moderate airplay on MTV.[65] In August, Vaughan and Double Trouble opened for Huey Lewis & the News at the USF Sun Dome, with Lewis saying that Vaughan was "absolutely the best guitarist I've ever heard".[73] On August 25, the band played at the Loreley Freilichtbühne in Sankt Goarshausen, Germany for the television series Rockpalast.[74] Two nights later, they performed at Alabamahalle in Munich, broadcast for the show Live aus dem Alabama.[75]

On October 4, 1984, Vaughan and Double Trouble performed a sold-out concert at Carnegie Hall in New York City,[21] a benefit for the T. J. Martell Foundation.[76] In celebration of Vaughan's birthday the night before, the concert featured an expanded group of musicians, including brother Jimmie on guitar, drummer George Rains and Austin vocalist Angela Strehli.[69] Keyboardist Booker T. Jones and the Tower of Power horn section were originally included in the lineup,[77] but were replaced by Dr. John and the Roomful of Blues horn section. Only the second set included the special guests. The musicians wore custom-tailored velvet charro suits made by Nelda's Tailors in Austin.[78] A special stage set was designed, complete with drum and horn risers.[76] It was built out of wood and painted with lapis blue enamel with gold-colored metallic striping.[78]

The ensemble warmed up at the Caravan of Dreams in Fort Worth,[78] rehearsed the show at Third Coast Studios in Austin, performed a dress rehearsal at a warehouse in New York,[76][78] and did a soundcheck at Carnegie Hall on the afternoon of the performance.[79] The concert was to be filmed, but budget and time constraints intervened.[80] The show started at 8 p.m. and Ken Dashow, DJ for WNEW-FM, welcomed the audience. He introduced John Hammond, who called Vaughan "one of the great guitar players of all time".[76][81] In the audience were Vaughan's wife Lenny and many friends. Martha and Big Jim flew in from Texas. Big Jim was in a wheelchair, ill from years of working with asbestos.[82]
Vaughan toured Australia and New Zealand, including two sold-out shows at the Sydney Opera House.[82] In New Zealand, he received word that he had won two W. C. Handy Awards for Blues Instrumentalist of the Year and Entertainer of the Year, the first white performer to receive either award.[83] He flew to Memphis for the ceremony at the Orpheum Theatre.[21] At its conclusion, he participated in an all-star jam to "Every Day I Have the Blues," made popular by B.B. King in 1955.[84][85]

In late 1984, Vaughan was asked to co-produce an album with musician Lonnie Mack by Bruce Iglauer, founder of Alligator Records.[86] Vaughan did not get along well with Iglauer, who found him to be "distant" and "inconsistent" during the sessions. In an interview, Iglauer said that he "wasn't used to seeing musicians being so flagrant in their drug and alcohol use".[87] Strike Like Lightning, Mack's first studio album in eight years, was released in 1985.[88] Even though all three were not happy with the results, Vaughan's friendship with Mack from the late 1970s endured.[88][89] With lengthy absences on the road, Vaughan's relationship with Lenny became tense, prompting them to take a vacation in Saint Croix on the Virgin Islands.[21] Upon their return, they moved to Volente, Texas, located on Lake Travis and about 30 miles (48 km) outside of Austin.[90]
In January 1985, Vaughan and Double Trouble went on a mini tour of Japan.[82][90] The January 24 show, at Shiba Yubin Chokin Hall in Tokyo, was filmed and released on CD and DVD as Live in Tokyo in 2006 and 2007, respectively. On February 3, 1985, Vaughan's longtime friend Charley Wirz, owner of Charley's Guitar Shop in Dallas, died from a heart attack.[84] He wrote a song dedicated to Wirz titled "Life Without You".[91] In March, the band started recording a new album at the Dallas Sound Lab.[84][92] Vaughan and Shannon's problems with alcohol and cocaine escalated.[93] They often played ping-pong and waited for their cocaine to arrive before recording.[94]

On April 10, Vaughan was asked to play "The Star Spangled Banner" at the Houston Astrodome for the Astros vs. Dodgers game. He flew to Houston with Lenny, to whom he confessed that he was not certain of the melody. She hummed it to him. Baseball legend Mickey Mantle threw the first pitch and signed Vaughan's "Lenny" guitar.[95] Vaughan played the national anthem with a Mighty Mite brass slide.[96] His performance was followed by negative reviews, with one reporter commenting, "I was sure he'd be dead by the time he hit 30".[97]

Discouraged by the lack of progress in the studio recordings, Vaughan wanted to expand the band by adding a keyboard player. Drummer Chris Layton invited session keyboardist Reese Wynans, who had performed with Delbert McClinton and Jerry Jeff Walker and Vaughan approved.[84] Both Sublett and Wynans were included in "Look at Little Sister," a Hank Ballard song.[94] Wynans became the band's full-time keyboardist.[98] After two months of recording, the band went on tour and performed at many festivals including the Chicago Blues Festival.[99] They also performed at the Montreux Jazz Festival for the second time.[21] Soul to Soul was released on September 30, 1985, which peaked at 34 on the Billboard 200.[100] While Couldn't Stand the Weather sold over a million copies, Soul to Soul sold half as many, leading Rolling Stone to suggest that they had "run out of gas".[101][102]

In February 1986, Vaughan and Double Trouble appeared on Saturday Night Live with Jimmie Vaughan, performing "Say What!" and "Change It".[103] In March, the group again toured Australia and New Zealand with Jimmie Vaughan's band The Fabulous Thunderbirds. While in Auckland, Vaughan met 17-year-old Janna Lapidus,[104] who had a successful modeling career during high school.[105] When Vaughan returned home to Austin, he found the house padlocked, electricity shut off and Lenny nowhere to be found.[106] According to authors Joe Nick Patoski and Bill Crawford, Lenny spent Vaughan's tour earnings on drugs while running around with other men.[106] Manager Chesley Millikin also announced that as of June 1, he would no longer represent the band, claiming it owed him $100,000.[107] They hired Alex Hodges, from International Creative Management, to be their full-time manager.[107][108] Although Vaughan let Hodges know that the group needed more time off from the road, Hodges disagreed, saying that the only way to get out of the debt was to tour as much as possible.[107]
Vaughan and Double Trouble performed shows at the Austin Opera House and Dallas Starfest to make recordings for their first live album, though they were filled with technical flaws.[106] The recordings were later released on the album Live Alive in November. During the show in Dallas, Vaughan spotted Lenny standing backstage shouting at him. Although he ignored her, she started to walk on stage and was dragged off by security guards.[109] She told the guards about a party at the Stoneleigh Hotel in Vaughan's honor hosted by Isaac Tigrett, founder of the Hard Rock Cafe. According to Lenny, Tigrett wanted to present Vaughan with one of Jimi Hendrix's Gibson Flying V guitars.[109] Following the show, Vaughan learned from family members that his father's condition was worsening. He left for the hotel with cousin Connie.[110] After playing Hendrix's guitar for a few minutes, Vaughan started to leave with it, but was stopped by Tigrett, who asked him to autograph it instead. Vaughan left the hotel in a rage.[110]

On July 27, Vaughan and Double Trouble played at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles, with special guests Hank Ballard and Mitch Mitchell.[111] The band also performed at San Diego State University, Santa Cruz Civic Auditorium and Oregon State Penitentiary.[111] On August 26, they participated in a taping of a television pilot for a series called American Caravan, hosted by musician Lonnie Mack at the Orpheum Theatre in Memphis.[87][111] Filmed for broadcast on PBS, American Caravan was Mack's attempt to host a program similar to Austin City Limits, though the series never went into syndication.[89] Before the show began, Vaughan received a phone call from his mother, Martha, who told him that his father was in the hospital and losing his battle with asbestosis.[87][111] The next day, he visited his father in Medical City Hospital.[89] Vaughan sat at his father's bedside with his mother and Jimmie. Assured by doctors that her husband's condition would not improve, Martha gave her approval to turn off life support.[89]

After attending his father's funeral, Vaughan was scheduled to play at the Miller Musicfest in Canada in Jarry Park.[112][113] Upon arrival, Vaughan discovered that $20,000 in musical equipment had been stolen. This caused the band to take the stage at 11 p.m., a three hour delay from their original agreement.[112] According to an investigation, a man claiming to be the band's manager made a telephone call to US Airways at Albany International Airport.[114] He said that when Vaughan's equipment arrived at the airport, it would be transported to his performance in Montreal. Airport employees packed nine road cases into a rented U-Haul truck, where the man pretending to be the manager disappeared with the equipment. Among the stolen equipment were custom-made effects for Stevie, amplifiers, Fender Stratocasters and a Vox wah-wah pedal that belonged to Jimi Hendrix.[112]
After weeks spent mixing the Live Alive album in Los Angeles, Vaughan and Double Trouble toured Europe, where they were scheduled to play 28 shows at venues like the Paris Olympia and Metropol.[113] On September 26, the band shared the bill with ZZ Top at the Circus Krone Building in Munich.[113] ZZ Top's manager, Bill Ham, was aware of Vaughan's addiction to drugs and pulled him aside after the show, warning him that he was "killing himself".[113] He also said that "whoever was responsible for Stevie's life and career had not intervened to rescue this talented young man from what appeared to be a downward spiral".[113]

Following a show in Ludwigshafen, Vaughan and Chris Layton tried and failed to find an open liquor store. While walking, Vaughan repeatedly stopped to vomit blood, a result of years of dissolving cocaine into Crown Royal whisky.[113][115] Returning to the hotel, he went to bed and vomited more blood. Vaughan began sweating and vomiting in an unconscious state. When he awoke he told Layton "I need help". Layton called an ambulance and the paramedics injected Vaughan with saline solution.[116] Lying on the hospital bed, he was shaking, sweating and pale. Paramedics determined that he had suffered near fatal dehydration. After performing in Zurich the next night, Vaughan was admitted to a hospital in London. He went under the care of Dr. Victor Bloom, who helped Eric Clapton and Pete Townshend kick their heroin addictions.[115][117] Dr. Bloom told Vaughan that the massive amounts of cocaine and whisky consumed had produced a gastric ulcer in his stomach. He also said that the cocaine was crystallizing and eating into his intestines.[93] He explained that if the habit continued, Vaughan would die within a month.[115] Vaughan called his mother and girlfriend Janna Lapidus, the model he had met in New Zealand months before:
Visitors included musicians Browne and Clapton.[118][119] Dr. Bloom suggested that Vaughan check in to Peachford Hospital in Atlanta.[120] The band agreed to one last London concert before returning to the United States, performing at the Hammersmith Palais. Vaughan resumed drinking although his mother and Lapidus were in the audience for moral support.[93] Wearing a war bonnet, Vaughan walked off stage with the band at the show's conclusion when the lights were shut off. He attempted to walk backstage across a plank and tripped, with cuts and scrapes on his legs.[120][121] The other 12 tour dates were canceled.
After two months in treatment, Vaughan and Shannon went on the road, playing their first sober show at the Towson Center in Maryland. They often attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.[122] The tour took the band to Radio City Music Hall and Fox Theatre in Atlanta on New Year's Eve with Lonnie Mack.[123] In January 1987, they played at the Fair Park Coliseum,[124] which was Vaughan's first sober performance in his hometown.[125] Vaughan and his brother hosted a show with The Fabulous Thunderbirds in a Mardi Gras television special on MTV.[126] In April, Vaughan made a guest appearance on a Cinemax television special called B.B. King & Friends: A Night of Red Hot Blues. Filmed at the Ebony Showcase Theatre in Los Angeles as a tribute to King, the special featured Clapton, Phil Collins, Dr. John and Albert King, as well as vocalists Etta James, Chaka Khan, Gladys Knight and Billy Ocean. Vocalist and harmonica player Paul Butterfield was also included, one month before his death from an overdose.[124][125]

It was during the summer of 1987 that Vaughan sat down with a writer for Nine-O-One Network Magazine while in Memphis for a concert at Mud Island and spoke honestly about his struggle with addiction. Said Vaughan:"I spend all of my spare time now working on myself and trying to keep from being so troubled inside. It's helping."[127]

Vaughan made several cameo appearances in films, including the 1987 movie Back to the Beach an appearance with surf rock guitarist Dick Dale. They both played "Pipeline," a major hit for The Chantays in 1963.[124] He was featured in the music video for "First We Take Manhattan" sung by Jennifer Warnes. In June, Vaughan and Double Trouble appeared on the Canadian television show It's Only Rock and Roll featuring Jeff Healey, who Vaughan had met in 1985. They played "Look at Little Sister". The band was part of a sold-out Volunteer Jam XIII at the Starwood Amphitheatre in Nashville, which was broadcast as part of the Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon. It was also where Lynyrd Skynyrd performed together for the first time in the ten years since Ronnie Van Zandt's death.[128]
In 1988, Vaughan and Double Trouble performed at the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, inviting B.B. King, Albert Collins and pianist Katie Webster on stage.[129] Vaughan was a part of a Stevie Wonder MTV special, Characters. Wonder, who had heard Vaughan's version of "Superstition" from Live Alive, had included Vaughan on the Characters album the previous year. He played guitar on a commercial for the Europa oil company with New Zealand blues guitarist Midge Marsden, who became friends with Vaughan after meeting him in Dallas. They toured together and Marsden lived in Vaughan's home at various times.[130]

When CBS Records (Epic's parent) was sold to Sony Music Entertainment in 1987, Hodges worked out a deal with Sony.[131] Vaughan and Lenny could not agree on a divorce settlement; the court required him to pay her a lump sum of $50,000,[132] with an additional $130,000 in attorney fees.[124] She also received 25 percent of future royalties on his four albums.[124] They toured Europe during the summer and played at many festivals.
On January 30, 1990, Vaughan appeared on MTV Unplugged.[143] In March, the Vaughan brothers decided to record an album together at Ardent Studios in Memphis,[144] working with producer Nile Rodgers.[145] Naming the album Family Style, Vaughan said, "We've probably gotten closer making this record than we have been since we were little kids at home. And I can honestly say I needed it".[146] Vaughan and Double Trouble went on a summer tour with singer Joe Cocker, performing with B.B. King for the Benson & Hedges Blues Festival at the Coca-Cola Starplex Amphitheatre in Dallas.[147] By August 13, all five of the band's albums were certified gold. On August 22, Sony Records arranged a party in Dallas for a preview of Family Style, though Vaughan was on vacation in Hawaii with Lapidus.[148] Upon their return, they rented an apartment in New York, where Lapidus started working regularly as a model.[148][149] Vaughan left for Chicago and checked into the Four Seasons Hotel.[148]
At around 1:00 a.m. on August 27, 1990, Vaughan was flying by helicopter from East Troy, Wisconsin to Chicago with members of Eric Clapton's tour crew. The helicopter crashed into the side of a 300-foot–high hill. Vaughan was killed, along with Nigel Browne and Colin Smythe.[150] Earlier that evening, Vaughan had played with Double Trouble at Alpine Valley Music Theatre, featured as a special guest with Eric Clapton, Buddy Guy, Robert Cray and Jimmie Vaughan.[151] Vaughan was interred at Laurel Land Memorial Park in Dallas, Texas.[152] Martha and Jimmie Vaughan sued the helicopter company, Omniflight, based in Addison, Texas, for negligence in allowing the unqualified pilot, Jeff Brown, to fly and for allowing the flight in dense fog.[153]
Vaughan's first guitar was a toy from Sears with a Western motif, given to him for his seventh birthday.[10] In 1963, he received his first electric guitar, a Gibson ES-125T 3/4, a hand-me-down from Jimmie Vaughan. He acquired a 1951 Fender Broadcaster called "Jimbo," a name which his brother carved into the back of the guitar.[154] He bought his first maple-neck Fender Stratocaster in 1969.[154]
One morning we were brought a dozen Australian wounded, men there was no room for in the crowded
forward aid station but who were not severe enough cases to be sent back for major surgery. They were, for
the most part, shrapnel victims where bursting shells tore through flesh and bone and sinew.
We had been warned to prepare for them, and the first inkling we had that they were arriving was an
assortment of whistles and jeers and general catcalls, from the English Tommies lying on stretchers or
sitting on whatever they could find. It was all good-natured, a rivalry of long standing. And then I heard the
most maniacal laughter, so wild and crazed that I went to see what was wrong, expecting some sort of head
wound. A burst of laughter followed the sound, and at that moment a tall Aussie Sergeant was limping
toward me.
He greeted me just as I recognized him as the soldier I’d asked for chocolate when the nuns had brought
in the five wounded children a few weeks earlier.
“Still searching for that little girl?” he asked, one hand gripping his other arm at the shoulder. I could see
beneath the hasty field dressings that it was lacerated, deep wounds still bleeding.
There was no time to answer—the other sisters were there, and we got the Australian soldiers inside and
began evaluating their wounds.
The Sergeant insisted that we look at his men before he would allow us to touch him, and as I worked on
a leg wound, cleaning it and removing bits of shell, he sauntered over, clapped the young private on the
back, and said, “Good lad.”
The boy—for he hardly seemed more than that—grinned weakly. He was pale, his teeth clenched against
the pain, but his Sergeant’s praise saw him through his ordeal.
The Sergeant then turned to me. “Ever find that lass you were looking for?” he asked again.
I was surprised he’d remembered our conversation.
“No luck so far.”
“You’re not going about it the right way,” he told me. “Put the word out, let others be on the lookout for her.”
I hesitated, for I realized that word could easily get back to Roger Ellis that an English nursing sister was
searching for a fair-haired orphan. But even if it did, there wasn’t much he could do about it, was there?
“I’d like to find her,” I said over my shoulder as I bandaged another soldier’s back. “Someone I knew was
set on finding her and bringing her back to England. He wasn’t the father, but he knew the father didn’t care
enough to rescue her. Only he was killed before he could return to France.”
“Killed?” the Sergeant asked, frowning. “In England, you mean?”
“He was murdered,” I admitted. “It’s a long story, but never mind. I just want to find her, and then perhaps
her family can be persuaded to bring her home. She’ll have a better life than she could have here in this wartorn
country.”
“I’ll put the word out,” he told me. “Describe her again.”
I did. “It must seem quite fantastical, but she ought to be just that pretty.”
“If you’ve never set eyes on the lass, how do you know so clearly what she looks like?”
A perceptive question. I smiled.
“There’s a portrait of another child—a—a relative of this one. I was told she bears a strong family
resemblance to Juliana. That’s how I know what to look for.”
“A needle in a haystack,” he said cheerfully, “but we’ll do what we can.”
One of his men began to scream as Sister Bedford probed for an elusive bit of shrapnel.
The Sergeant was there, saying, “Buck up, my lad, you don’t want those Tommies out there laughing up
their sleeves at us.”
The soldier grinned sheepishly. “No, Sergeant. But it damned well hurts.”
“You can scream at the Hun when we get back to our lines.”
That brought a shout of laughter from the others.
While I appreciated the Sergeant’s willingness to help—I was grateful, in fact—I rather thought he was
enjoying flirting with me, and as soon as he and his company were back in the line, my orphan child would
be forgotten.
The Sergeant himself took the painful digging in his shoulder stoically, tight lipped and teeth clenched. I
could see the muscle in his jaw clearly.
When we’d finished, he ordered his men to follow him, and “stop cluttering up the sisters’ ward.”
I said, “Wait, where is the man with the head wound?”
He looked at me, then scanned his company. “The only one with the head wound didn’t make it, Sister,”
he said, frowning. “Unless you’re counting Teddy, there, of course.”
He gestured to the private who had had bits of shrapnel in his scalp.
“I’m sorry,” I said, thinking that the man must have died outside the station. I added, “But I daresay your
man Teddy will survive.”
“You’d better believe he will,” the Sergeant said, grinning. “I promised his mother special.”
And they were gone.
One of the sisters working on a stretcher case watched them walk away. “I do like tall men,” she
commented. “And that one in particular.”
My next encounter with the Australian Sergeant was nearly a fortnight later, in the form of a message
brought to me by a Scottish Corporal who had met him on a muddy road outside Ypres. The Corporal’s arm
was in a makeshift sling, and I could tell before I had cut away his sleeve that it was badly broken. He said,
his face pale with pain, “Is there a Sister here called Crawford?”
“I’m Sister Crawford,” I said as I finished with the scissors and laid bare the broken limb.
“I’m to gie ye this, then,” he answered, and with his good hand, he fished a slip of dirty paper from his
blouse. “There’s a Sergeant Larimore fra’ Australia who’s been sending messages back by any wounded
laddie he meets.”
“Ah, the Australian,” I said, smiling, taking the sheet and opening it. I found it was a list of orphanages that
he’d somehow come up with by questioning everyone in sight, or so it appeared. I could never have
collected such a list on my own, not without weeks of intense searching.
“Bless him,” I said, after scanning it.
The Corporal replied, “If it’s only a list that will make ye smile, I’ll draw up one masel’.”
Shaking my head, I said, “It’s not any list. I’m searching for a convent that used to be in a house on the
road south of Ypres. They took in a number of orphans, but with the fighting had to move south to Calais.
After that I’ve lost touch with them. There’s a child in that group of orphans that I’m trying to find, for a—a
friend.”
“Ye’ll niver find one child in the hotch potch of religious houses,” he said earnestly. “Ye ken, there’s likely
one on ivery corner.”
Spoken like a true Scots Covenanter, I thought, scandalized by Catholic France.
The doctor had come to have a look at his arm, and I prepared to move away.
“Is it important, Sister?” the Corporal asked. “Yon list.”
“Very.”
“Aye, well, I’ll pass the word back,” he told me, and I thanked him.
It was another week before I could take the few days coming to me and find a lift to Calais. An officer, a
Major Fielding, was carrying dispatches to be sent on to London, something to do with ordnance, and as I
got down near the harbor, he said, “Do you drive, Sister Crawford?”
“Yes, sir, I do.”
“Then keep the motorcar, will you? I’ll be back from London in three days and I’d like to find it here whole,
not commandeered or stripped of parts badly needed elsewhere. It’s my own motorcar, you see.”
“Thank you, sir! I’ll take good care of it.”
“See that you do. And meet me here on the dot of noon in three days’ time.”
I saw him off and gratefully turned the motorcar to go in search of the house where the nuns had taken
shelter after leaving their convent on the road to Ypres.
Easier said than done. When I stopped a French priest and asked him where to look, he shrugged in that
Gallic expression of ignorance.
“What can I say, Sister. There are so many houses dispossessed by this war. But if you go to the church
two streets over, the one whose tower is visible from here, they may be able to help you.”
And so I found myself in the office of the monsignor of St. Catherine’s Church.
He was a thin man, prematurely aged by war and responsibility, but he took time to listen to me.
I showed him my list, courtesy of the Australian Sergeant, and he scanned it quickly.
“You permit?” he asked, pen poised over the sheet of paper. When I nodded, he began to make notes.
“This house had only six elderly nuns,” he said, “And this one is now in Rouen, but I don’t know if they have
orphans in their care. Their duty before the war was to the sick, much like yourself, and in particular, the care
of the elderly and aged, many of whom have nowhere else to go. This next house is also in Rouen, and it
may be the one you seek. But I make no promises. This and this and this house are now scattered.” He
shrugged again. “Alas, I have no way of knowing where the rest may be. We are endeavoring to keep up
with the displacement of religious houses, but there are so many, and I am one man.”
As I thanked him for his assistance, he asked, “What is your business with this child you seek?”
“I don’t know,” I told him truthfully. “But it’s a charge I was given, to find her and make certain that she is
safe.”
“Is the child’s mother French?”
“I was told that she was. Which is why the child is in an orphanage. The father, we believe he is an English
officer, didn’t know that the mother of the child died, and by the time he discovered that, she was already in
this orphanage or another like it.”
“And why is he not seeking this child himself?”
“I have reason to believe that he is. But France is wide, and one child is hard to find.”
“And you do not know how this child is called?”
“If I did,” I said, “it would make my task easier. But I do know what she looks like, and if I see her, it’s
possible that I will recognize her.”
He considered me for a moment. “There was someone here also searching for a small child. I was not in
Calais, you understand, and my housekeeper told this Englishman, an officer, that we could not help him.
She was suspicious, you see. She did not think he was”—he looked for the right word—“ ‘so frantic as a
father should be, if his child was missing.’ ”
“Does she remember when this Englishman came—and what he looked like?”
“It was three weeks ago. I know, because I was in Lille at the time.”
Then it wasn’t George Hughes, trying to discover where the nuns at the convent on the Ypres road had
gone. It had to be Roger Ellis.
. . . so frantic as a father should be, if his child was missing.
“Why then was he searching for the little girl?” I asked, curious.
“I have no idea.” He smiled. “She is afraid, Madame Buvet, that he would take the child to England and
rear her as a heretic.”
“Is that so terrible, if she is loved and given a proper home?”
“In the mind of my housekeeper, better an orphan than a heretic.”
“But you have helped me.”
“You are a nursing sister. I believe that you are concerned for the welfare of this little girl.”
“And if the English officer comes again?”
“I shall judge him for myself. And then I shall decide what is best to do.”
I thanked him again, and went out to the motorcar. Three private soldiers from a Yorkshire regiment had
lifted the bonnet, and when I appeared, they quickly lowered it again. “Sister,” they said, almost in unison,
coming smartly to attention. “May we turn the crank for you?” one of them asked.
I could see then why Major Fielding had feared for the safety of his transport. I was pleased to find that the
motor did turn over and nothing appeared to be missing as I drove on.
It was not far to Rouen, as a French crow might fly. But given the heavy traffic of military vehicles and the
condition of the roads, I didn’t arrive in the city until well after midnight. For a mercy the town was quiet. The
Base Hospital in the old race course was brightly lit, but the motor ambulance convoys, lorries, and
omnibuses bringing in the wounded were thin on the ground with the lull in the fighting. Even the trains that
brought in many of the wounded were idle. The raw recruits had already marched up from the River Seine
and found their billets for the night. No one had the energy to fill the bistros and the corner wine shops at this
hour.
This English Base Hospital for the wounded was manned by American doctors and nurses, filling in the
decimated ranks of English medical men. Indeed, the shortage had become acute. I’d sent patients to them
from the advanced dressing stations and knew that they did good work. But I never quite understood why
the permanent buildings at the course had been turned into offices and the wounded were housed in tents.
Ever mindful of the fact that I must return to meet Major Fielding in one more day’s time, I knocked at the
door of a house on Rue des Champignons that an elderly gendarme had directed me to in the maze of halftimbered
housing in an older quarter near the river.
The sleepy nun acting as porter opened the small peephole in the door and peered out at me. “What do
you want of us at this hour, Mademoiselle?” she asked in French heavily accented by the Breton tongue.
“I’m an English nursing sister,” I said, for that she could see for herself. “I’ve come to ask if you have
children here, orphans. We treated several children some time ago, and I wish to be certain that they are no
longer in need of care.”
“You are from the Base Hospital? But we have no children here, Sister. There is no space for the little
ones. We have only the aged and the dying.”
Disappointed, I asked, “But did you have children at one time? There was a very young nun who brought
them to me. I’m sorry I don’t remember her name.”
“We have no young nuns here. You must be mistaken. But we did have thirteen children at one time.”
“And where are they now?”
“Here in Rouen.” And she gave me the direction of another house, this one on the Rue St. Jean.
I thanked her and drove on. In the dark, it was very difficult to find this particular house. It was south of the
cathedral, and as I crossed the Place in front of it, I looked up at the great west front, the lacey stonework
and niches so heavily shadowed in the starlight that they were almost sinister, the faces of the saints dark
and unreadable. Above my head, the three great towers were stark against the night sky, the iron tower at
the center almost lost in the blackness of the night.
The house I was looking for was on a back street in a quarter that a century ago had been prosperous,
the buildings huddled cheek by jowl with their neighbors, as if for comfort and support. Still, it was large
enough to accommodate several nuns and their charges.
I knocked on the door, but no one answered my summons, and so I sat in the motorcar until a murky dawn
began to break. By that time I was so cold and stiff I could hardly get out and walk to the door.
An elderly nun answered my summons, although she had taken her time about it. And I saw why, when the
door swung open, for beneath her woolen robes, one foot was encased in a heavy boot with a thick sole,
designed to make the left leg the same length as the right.
She asked my business, and I again used the ploy that I had come to see if the children that had been
treated at the English aid station were in need of further care.
To my utter relief, she invited me into the foyer. It was a blessed reprieve from the morning cold outside,
although still hardly what I would consider warm.
“We have fifteen orphans here,” she was saying. “None of them to my knowledge treated by the English.”
She made it sound as if they would have been treated by the devil and his cohorts, but I smiled and asked
if I could see the other children, since I was here.
“Yes, it is hard to find medicines for the little ones. Do you have medicines? Come with me.”
She led me through a labyrinth of rooms to a large kitchen, where a small fire had been built on a hearth
large enough to roast an ox. A kettle of what appeared to be something like porridge was bubbling on the
hob, and I could feel my mouth water.
At a long table sat the children, who fell silent and looked up from their bowls to stare at me with wide
dark eyes, wary and uncertain. I was sure that strangers seldom brought good tidings to this house. Another
nun, older than the first, was also staring at me, pausing as she stirred the contents of the black iron pot.
My heart plummeted when I realized that the youngest of the fifteen was nearly five. And I had never seen
any of them before.
“Are there by any chance younger children here?” I asked the nun.
“Younger?” she asked sharply, straightening up.
“Yes. In particular a little girl of perhaps two years of age. Very fair, very sweet smile.”
“There is a little boy upstairs, badly burned from falling into the fire. But no little girl.”
“Then I will see the little boy, if you like.”
“He has been treated by the local doctor,” the nun said, returning to her pot. I could see that she didn’t
care for my coming here. I wondered what her experience of the war had been, for I could see that she had
a long scar, healed but still raw and red, down one side of her face.
“Then he’s in good hands,” I assured her. “Do you know where I might find this little girl? Is there another
orphanage in Rouen?”
I was prepared to hear that there was not. It was the first nun who answered me, after a quick glance at
her companion.
“Three streets away, in Rue St. Catherine, there is another house, not of our order. But they have some
nine children there, I believe. Mostly infants younger than these.”
“Thank you,” I said, then asked, “Is there anything I can do for you?”
“There’s no money for anything. The church does what it can. But there are so many refugees. It’s very
difficult.”
I thought at first she was asking me for money, for a donation for the children. And then I realized she was
saying something else, that the war had disrupted her quiet life in a convent devoted to prayer and
contemplation. Instead she was struggling to feed and dress and care for children in a dilapidated house in
a town that was within hearing of the guns that had changed all their lives. I had to wonder if her faith had
been tested almost beyond her ability to cope.
I nodded and made my way back through the warren of rooms that couldn’t be kept warm or made more
comfortable. And growing children needed more than just porridge. But there were shortages in England as
well. What was happening in Germany? Were they suffering too?
I drove on to the house the nun had described.
It too was old and tired, and the smoke coming from its chimneys was thin and discouraging. I lifted the
weather-etched iron anchor and let it drop against the iron plate.
This time the nun who came to the door was frail, her face lined, but her eyes were a vivid blue that was in
sharp contrast to the soft, sagging skin of age. “Sister,” she said, “how may we help you?”
“I’m looking for a child,” I said, giving her the same account that I had used before.
She smiled. “That would be Sophie. Yes, come in. I’m Sister Marie Joseph.”
The carpet was threadbare, the furniture in desperate need of polish, the walls in dire need of paint,
patches of the ornate ceiling stained by water from a roof that most probably should have been replaced
even before the war.
“Tell me how you knew about Sophie?” she asked, offering me a chair. I could understand that she was
reluctant to let me, a stranger, see Sophie, and what I was about to say would determine whether or not I
would be allowed beyond this parlor.
I tried to explain that someone in England had begged me to find her.
She nodded. “Her mother told me that the father was English.”
“And she is dead?”
“Oh, yes, of a raging fever a week after childbirth. We had taken her in, she had nowhere else to go. She
had gone to market the day that a shell landed squarely on the kitchen of her house. She came to us, then,
already in her fifth month of pregnancy. A lovely young woman, I must tell you. She was an enormous help to
us for as long as her health was good. But we lacked the food she needed. Not enough milk or meat, but
still, she would have lived but for the fever.”
“May I see the child?” I asked. “I have come a long way.”
“She’s asleep, but yes, you may look in on her. You will carry the lamp for me, please.”
She climbed the stairs with an effort, holding on to the banister and almost pulling herself up the narrow
steps.
In a bedroom on the first floor were two cribs, and in one of them, wrapped in a blue blanket with a ragged
fringe was a little girl with golden hair that shimmered in the dark like a halo as the lamplight struck it. She
lay asleep with her thumb in her mouth, the edge of a night dress just visible at her throat.
I moved quietly into the room to see her better. In the next crib was another little girl, perhaps a year or so
older, but small framed for her age.
The elderly nun said softly, “Is she the child?”
I couldn’t see her eyes or her smile, I couldn’t see her face fully.
But I had no doubt that this was the little girl George Hughes had seen.
“Has she always been in your care?” I asked softly.
The elderly nun said, “Our house was larger and we had more children. But of necessity we have had to
separate, some to the Loire, near Angers, and others to Caen. Wherever we could be taken in. The children
too have been separated. This house was given to us by a family that was moving to Marseilles, away from
the war altogether. They feared another German breakthrough. And we’ve been fearful ourselves. But there
is nowhere to go.”
And the family had been clever, leaving these nuns in charge of their home. It wouldn’t be vandalized or,
worse, filled with refugees desperate for a roof over their heads.
I crossed the room and put a hand on the child’s silky hair.
And realized that she was feverish.
I said something to the nun, and she nodded. “It’s been a trial for all of us. She sleeps now, because we
have given her a drop of something to help her. But we can find no cause for this fever. The doctor has been
called to her. He says she is teething.”
But teething was not the problem, I was sure of it. “How long has it been going on?”
“It rose the night before this last.”
I reached into the bed and unfolded the blanket that had been a barrier against the cold in this room. Then
I lifted the little nightdress that was too large by half.
What I saw made me draw back quickly.
“She has chicken pox. It has finally erupted. I must wash my hands at once, for I work with wounded men.
But I will tell you how to treat her. And you must remove this other child quickly. She and the others may have
been exposed already. But if you keep Sophie quarantined, you may escape a general outbreak.”
“But when I bathed her last evening, there were no spots,” she said, leaning over the crib to examine
Sophie’s back.
“No, possibly not. But warm water would have hastened the eruption. Please cover her again. I dare not
touch her.”
The nun gently drew the nightdress together again and then tucked the blanket around the child.
Between us we moved the other crib into another room where one of the nuns slept. And then I was shown
to a kitchen where I could wash my hands with a scrap of carbolic soap and dried them on a towel that had
seen better days.
“Soap is hard to come by,” the nun said, apologizing.
“I understand,” I said, wishing I had a cake to give her.
The problem was, if Sophie was ill, leaving here with her was out of the question. Even if I could persuade
Sister Marie Joseph to allow me to take her. For that matter, where could I take her? A dressing station was
no place for a child. And I had no more leave coming to me for the foreseeable future. Was Lydia even of
the same mind about wanting her? I could try to find Roger Ellis, but was that wise? I hadn’t been able to
read his intentions toward this child. Still, she must be his. She couldn’t look so much like Juliana if she
weren’t.
After that one letter from Lydia reporting the inquest, there had been no others. I didn’t know whether they
had failed to reach me or she hadn’t written.
I said to Sister Marie Joseph after I’d washed my hands and accepted the offer of a little coffee from their
precious store, “I know this child’s family. I wish to ask them what they would have me do, now that Sophie
has been found. Will you keep her here, until I’ve learned what is expected of me?”
“I would like to see this child—indeed all the children—safe. But we have been charged with her care, and
I cannot simply hand her over to you or anyone else, without some proof that you have the authority to take
her.”
“I understand,” I said. “You must be assured that this is not a frivolous request.”
“I permitted you to see her, because you are a nursing sister,” she went on. “A woman I could trust with the
knowledge that she is here. And to reassure her English father that she has not been abandoned. But
beyond that, there is nothing I can do until it is decided that she belongs in your charge. There is an
avocat—a lawyer,” she added in English when I frowned over the term, “here in Rouen who arranged for this
house to be left in our care. You must speak with him, and if he agrees to represent this child, we will abide
by whatever decision he makes for her future. There could be the question too of any inheritance. It’s
possible that her mother’s husband provided for her.”
“That’s very fair,” I said. I hadn’t considered a French husband.
She rose in a swirl of black wool, and I knew she was pleased with my answer. Crossing to the small
desk behind where I was sitting, she found paper and pen and wrote out the name and the direction of the
French solicitor. Bringing it to me, she said, “Sophie is very pretty—it will not serve her well, this beauty, in
the future. We cannot protect her always. You understand?”
“I do understand. Completely. Has anyone else come in search of her?”
“No. We were certain that the father must be dead. To abandon such a young child seemed cruel. Unless
of course he has a wife in England. These things happen, you know.”
Sadly, I did.
Thanking her, I left the house and went out to the Major’s motorcar. Turning it, I drove back the way I had
come to prevent getting lost in the twisting streets. It had started to rain, the cobblestones slippery and grimy
under a darkening sky.
I had just passed the cathedral for the second time, searching for the Street of Fishes, where the avocat
lived, when I saw that another motorcar was coming toward me. I pulled over as far as I dared in the narrow,
medieval street, to allow it to pass me. The wings were dented and the paint was scratched but I recognized
it as English, then looked up to see who was driving it.
He must have turned to look in my direction because I was conspicuous in my blue coat and hat. Anyone
in this part of France could identify my uniform at a glance.
Our eyes met, and I recognized Captain Ellis in the same instant he recognized me