80 


1. All the money you will ever need. 
2. Any house or houses you want. 
3. Any type of car you would like to own. 
4. Great sex life and warm, caring relationships. 
5. Total freedom from damaging mental and emotional hang ups. 
6. Control of your own mind and body. 
7. Greatly improved health. (This will be the subject of next month’s 
release. 
8. Time to spend exactly how you want. 
9. PEACE OF MIND. 
I have shown you the above list because it is a basic representation of 
many peoples goals in life. It is a rough guide and it is not intended that you 
copy or slavishly apply them to your own life. You will no doubt have many 
different things you want to include or exclude from it. 

Having said that, you may notice that the first three items relate 
strongly to wealth. You might think money is mentioned a great deal. Even 
number eight could also involve the subject of money since being able to 
spend your time as you wish would suggest that you have sufficient funds to 
let you do this:- i.e. you don’t have to go out and work when your boss tells 
you to. 

The fact is money is a tangible item and at the end of the day is a 
means to an end. I have used it as a convenient example and as I have said 
before your priorities may be quite different. You might want to spend more 
time with your family. You might want to reduce you tendency to get stressed 
in given situations or you might want to learn and master the French 
language. It does not matter. Whatever you want to achieve you can use the 
same techniques learned here. 

If your goals seem to suggest that you should need to boast your 
income then that’s fine. You might have to calculate exactly how much money 
you will need and what income you would like to be earning “X” days from 
now. 

What you have to do now is decide on a strategy for the short term, 
medium term and long term. Also it is a good ideas to start with small goals 
before going on to the larger and more ambitious ones. Firstly set yourself 
some tasks or goals say of things you have been putting off for ages. It could 
be anything. Perhaps making contact with an old friend you have not seen in 
ages or putting up that shelf in the kitchen that you have been tripping over for 
the past three months! 

This is a good idea because by setting little goals you can rapidly move 
on to larger ones once you get steady positive results. In other words success 

81 


builds on success. Before you can set any goals you learn how to write them 
down in a way that will have a strong effect on your subconscious and 
conscious mind. Just making a vague list is no good your success depends 
on how you phrase your suggestions. 

Before going any further I would like you to re-read Part Two of this 
course particularly the part dealing with how to word your affirmations for use 
in Hypnosis. 

I have made a list of the rules you should follow below:


Rule One:Be 
as positive as possible. 
Rule Two:Use 
the present tense. 
Rule Three:Be 
specific in your affirmations. 
Rule Four:Give 
your subconscious a time limit to work to. 
Rule Five:Use 
clear simple language. 
Rule Six:Use 
strongly emotive words in your suggestion. 
Rule Seven:Repeat 
the goal as often and in many different ways 
as possible. 
Rule Eight:Suggest 
you can/are doing something. Not just the 
ability to do it. 

Let us assume we are going to set some medium term goals. Just for 
the sake of argument let us assume today’s date is 1st January 1998 and you 
have some small goals/tasks you want to get started on. 

“By 5th January 1998 I have put up the white melamine shelf in the kitchen which 

makes life much easier for the whole family”. 

This is a very basic goal but I have made it as up beat and as positive 
as possible by relative the advantages to the family. After all it is only a kitchen 
shelf I have used the present tense and been specific as to when the task will 
be done. Now lets try something else. 

“Because I wish to be financially secure and independent I enjoy putting money 

aside regularly. By 1st April 1998 I have doubled my savings in my TESSA account 

from £1000 to £2000.” 

This is completely useless. It is far too vague. When are you going to 
save the money? How much? Similarly you would not write:This 
is a simple specific task but still has an up beat positive suggestion 
behind it. What you would not do is say something like:


82 


“Very soon I want to save a lot more money”. 

This is completely useless. It is far too vague. When are you going to save the 

money? How much? Similarly you would not write:


“I would like a big, fancy, £30,000 car”. 

“By 1st January 1999 I own and drive a black Mercedes model XYZetc with . . .and 
name every detail you can think of. 

Another important point when writing out you goals is that you have 
write down precisely what you actually mean. You should almost imagine it is 
a kind of legal document. You would not want to write “By the 1st January 
1999 I drive a black Mercedes model etc There is a big difference between 
owning a Mercedes and just being able to drive one. I mean you could just go 
out and hire one for the day if that is all you want or get a job as a chauffeur. I 
hope you see the difference. 

I hope you can see the difference between the two. Now look at the next one:


“By the 1st February 1999 I am living in a wonderful four bedroom house with a 

double garage, in the Glades area of Esher. The garden is at least an acre of well 
kept beautiful lawns containing a tennis court.” 

Most of the rules mentioned earlier have been used here. The goal has 
a time limit. It is detailed and not woolly. It uses emotive language but is not 
too complicated or wordy. Now I hope you get the general Idea. What’s next? 

Verbalise your affirmations or goals:


Writing out your goals is important but it is also important to read them out 
aloud to yourself. This should be done when you are alone. You don’t have to 
shout them out you can just whisper them to yourself but the important thing is 
to feel strong positive emotion when you do this. Use a positive tone of voice. 

Visualisation :


This is a very important step which should NOT be skipped. If you were 
using the goal concerning the house you would want to imagine walking into 


your new house on a beautifully sunny day with light streaming through the 
windows. Look at the wall paper. The colour of the bathroom suite. See how 
well equipped the kitchen is etc. Visualisation is very important in impressing 
the subconscious mind. Remember it responds well to emotion. 

Key Words And Phrases:


Next to each goal you have written out select a key word or phrase 
which sums up what it is you are striving for. In the example above you might 
write “Wonderful House” or just “House”. Once you have read out each goal 
you should sit back and close your eyes and go into a trance for a few 
moments and visualise yourself enjoying the fruits of your goals. Key words or 
phrases are a good way to encapsulate everything you have written out in 
your goal. Your subconscious will fill in the rest. If you chant the key word 
gently to yourself the message will find its way deeper into your subconscious. 
This step is part of the visualisation process. 

How many goals should I write? 

Personally I would not write out more than five goals when you are 
starting out and keep them simple and in the short term to begin with. They 
might include the kitchen shelf at first, or concern enrolling on a course of 
French lessons, or starting a correspondence course. However to begin with 
for the first thirty days I would recommend you stick to the two affirmations 
mentioned below plus one or two short term goals with a time scale of about 
one week. 

1.) I achieve everything I set out to achieve. All opportunities I are 
available to me. (You can visualise yourself walking down a corridor with 
hundreds of closed doors. These doors have signs on them like languages, 
travel, music, sports, anything you can think of You should particularly put 
mental signs on the doors of any thing that you have fancied doing but up until 
now have been afraid to try. When you can picture all these closed doors on 
either side of you simply stroll down the corridor and kick all these doors 
violently open.) 

2.) Every single day I become more and more positive in my attitude and 
actions in life. This makes me more and more open and successful in 
everything I strive for. 

3.)……………….. 

4)……………….. 


The first two goals are very important to you and lay the foundations for 
anything else you do later. The cassette tape you received last month will be 
of incredible use to you here. If you have been using it regularly then your 
state of mind should be becoming much more positive and resilient. The 
techniques described on that tape are very powerful. 

It is important that you don’t get too impatient at this stage. Many 
people get too carried away and they overload their minds with too many 
varying goals all at once. Remember try not to have conflicting goals. Don’t 
say you will be a multimillionaire in twelve months time and say you will only 
be working two minutes a week, the rest of the time you will be spending on 
the beach. 

As you get more experienced however it is important that you don’t limit 
yourself. If you want to live in a ten bedroom mansion don’t make it your goal 
to live in a three bedroom semi You will not be motivated. Your subconscious 
will move heaven and earth if it knows you really want something, believe you 
are worth it, and knows you CAN get it. Don’t worry about how you are going 
to get it. Once you have programmed your subconscious mind correctly you 
will be amazed as to how many ideas will appear as if by magic and at the 
most peculiar time. It is for this reason you should always keep a small pad 
and paper with you at all times especially by the bed. 

How To Use Your Very Own Subconscious Computer:


If you have an obstacle or “problem” to overcome and you cannot think 
of a solution try the following technique:


At the top of a clean piece of paper write out as precisely as possible 
what the situation is. Then beneath it make two columns for and against. 
Underneath write down at least twenty possible solutions. It does not matter if 
these solutions seem un-workable just write down anything and everything 
that come to mind. Next to each solution write down the potential draw backs 
that each solution carries. You will find that the five or so solutions will come 
reasonably easily but as you go on it will get harder. 

Now you might find this simple technique alone solves the “problem” 
/obstacle you are having but if you still cannot solve it consciously ask you 
subconscious to help. What you do is sit down and calm yourself down and 
then read out what the “problem” is and go into a light trance and, after about 
five minutes or so, ask you subconscious computer to give you the solution. If 
its a pressing matter the it is best to ask it to let you have the solution by a 
certain time lets say twenty four hours from now. 

85 


Once you have done this you can simply forget about it. 

You will know when the right answer appears because you get a feeling 
of “eagerness” or “excitement”. The answer will be “complete” or “obvious” 
often be very detailed. Sometimes you will wonder why you didn’t think of it 
before! 

WARNING! 


You must act upon the answer it gives you otherwise it 
will be some time before it works for you again. 

It works best if you can get yourself into a state of trust and 
acceptance. These powers and abilities are perfectly natural. They are not 
superhuman but simply human and you are supposed to use them. The results 
can often be astounding. Remember for this technique to work properly you 
must do the following:


1. Write down the “problem”. 
2. Try to find solutions. 
3. Ask you subconscious to help. 
4. Act upon the answer it gives you. 
86 


Putting It All Together:


Daily Routine:


Goal setting works best if you set aside about ten to fifteen minutes 
each morning to go through the different stages. You may to set your alarm a 
bit earlier. This is why you don’t want to set yourself too many goals at any 
one time, it takes too long and tends to water down the effectiveness of the 
process. You will need to be alone so that you will not be disturbed. Perhaps 
you will have to leave for work a bit earlier, you can use these techniques 
away from home in your car or at the office. 

Now lets assume you have written out your goals on your piece of good 
quality paper. This is your master set of goals which you keep very safe. The 
first thing you will do is to re-write your goals out on a separate piece of paper. 
This fixes them consciously in your mind. 

Next you read them out aloud to yourself or whisper them under your 
breath but feel positive and good about yourself while you do this. 

Now sit back and relax. Close your eyes, take a few deep breaths and 
go into a light trance. Next start to visualise each goal in turn as though you 
are enjoying them, make them as real as you possibly can. Lastly use your 
key words for each goal. Chant them to yourself for a few moments and let 
yourself drift a little deeper into trance. When you have finished slowly come 
out of you trance to full awakening consciousness. 

You can repeat this process at night if you want to or alternatively just 
do the first two stages of writing your goals out and read them out aloud. 
When you drift off to sleep your subconscious will do the rest. 

Make Lists And Get Organised! 

If you are to benefit from all you have learned in Part Three and this 
release you need to get into some kind of routine otherwise inertia takes hold 
and nothing gets done. 

It is all very well just reading about this stuff but putting it into action is 
what really counts. For this reason I have printed out a weekly check list of 
things you should do each day so that you can chart your progress. 

87 


It combines the daily exercises we covered last month concerning 

Positive Self Image. Just to jog your memory here they are again:


1). “I like myself” . (You can repeat this as often as you like). 

2). “Good morning, you’re looking really great today”. 

3). “My god your a really terrific guy/girl”. 

4). “You and I are really going places”. 

5). “I feel really terrific this morning”. 

If you remember I suggested you look into the bath room mirror each 
morning and give yourself a metaphorical/emotional hug each morning. 

I have also left three spaces for you to put in any daily routines you 
might think helpful like physical exercise or whatever. I have also left twelve 
spaces for you to write in those things we all have to do on a day to day basis. 
It is so easy to forget day to day tasks so I find it incredibly useful to make 
lists in this way. 

Just photocopy the page as often as you need. 

88 


Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat Sun 
P.S.I a.m. 
Give yourself a Hug: 
p.m. 
Give yourself a Hug: 
Goals a.m. 
Write: 
Verbalise: 
Visualise: 
p.m. 
Write: 
Verbalise 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
89 


There are only four reasons why you might 
not achieve your Goals:


1. You are not serious about or inspired enough about the 
goals you have chosen. 
2. You have not built up your PSI enough and so don’t 
believe you are worth succeeding at your goals. 
3. You have not built up a sufficiently strong ICF. 
4. Or it is a mixture of all four! 
Choosing different goals may be necessary or simply rewriting or 
rewording them will often work wonders. You can never have enough of 
a “Positive Self Image” or for that matter an “I Can Factor” so you must 
never neglect these two vital areas. If you do these things you cannot fail. 

Before I go let me leave you with another quote:


“We generally change ourselves for one of two reasons: 

inspiration or desperation.” Jim Rohn. 

I think there is a great deal of truth in this statement you should 
give it a lot of thought. 

The next release is one of the most important so 
read it carefully! It deals with your health and what 
part your mind can play in improving it. I promise 
you it really is a fascinating area. 

90 


How To Tap The Incredible 

Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind! 



Part Five 


Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


91 


Part Five. 


“Health is easier to maintain than it is to acquire.” Doctor Russ Jaffe 

(1984). 

What you are about to read now might seem alien to some people 
may be even a bit bizarre. I don’t want you to dismiss what you are 
reading here before you have had a chance to fully consider the true 
implications. Please read this section through at least twice and 
experiment with exercises given for a reasonable length of time before 
coming to any finite conclusions about their effectiveness, (I think you will 
be more than a little surprised) 

Far from being faddy or just some new craze most of what you are 
about to learn is firmly based on tried and tested methods refined over a 
great many years and firmly based on vast amounts of empirical 
research. 

HOW YOUR MIND CAN AFFECT YOUR HEALTH! 

Western medical research is slowly coming to terms with the fact 
that our minds have a much more important role in determining our state 
of health than was previously thought. 

In America an experiment involving five year olds revealed some 
interesting results which are at odds with conventional medical opinion. 
Saliva samples were taken from the children just before they were shown 
a video which used glove puppets as characters in a story. One set of 
puppets played the part of nasty viruses and bacteria trying to invade 
their bodies while another set of puppets were the good guys who acted 
as policemen and stopped the nasty bugs. After the video the children 
were told to lie down and relax while thinking about the good puppets 
attacking and arresting the nasty bugs. After a few minutes new samples 
saliva were taken. When they tested the second samples they 
discovered that they contained double the amount of immune 
substances. 

Scientists working in the relatively new field of 
Psychoneuroimmunology, this is the study of the mind and how it 
interacts with our immune systems, have made what are to western 
medical minds some startling discoveries. The main thrust of their 
discovery is that the mind can have a significant effect on the 
effectiveness of our bodies immune defence mechanisms. 

Last century the great Russian physiologist Ivan Petrovic Pavlov 
carried out various experiments in conditioned responses. In his later life 
hedeveloped an interest in the functions of the brain in relation to 

92 


digestion. In one famous experiment he would ring a bell just before 
bringing a number of dogs their food. On each occasion he would 
measure the amount of saliva each dog produced. He established that 
the dogs would produce the same amount of saliva after he rang the bell 
whether food was present or not. This phenomena was called 

conditioned reflex. 

In one recent set of experiments, which utilised techniques similar 
to those created by Pavlov, subjects were given a quantity of adrenaline 
at the same time as they were given a sherbet sweet. Adrenaline has 
been shown to stimulate the bodies immune system and produce 
increased quantities of (k.cells) or killer cells which are believed to be 
effective in fighting some cancers. Before and after each subject is given 
adrenaline blood samples are taken for analysis. 

What excited the researchers was that when a subject was 
unknowingly given a sweet but no adrenaline, they were just given a 
placebo instead, their body still produced increased numbers of killer 
cells. In fact their blood would typically contain nearly double the amount 
of killer cells after this treatment than before. 

This experiment forced scientists to ask the question can we train our 
mind to fight diseases like cancer. 

By chance another interesting discovery was made in a hospital 
treating cancer patients. Because of the unpleasant nature of Chemo 
therapy with all the nasty side effects like nausea and so on doctors 
decided to do something to help them. What they did was teach some 
patients simple relaxation techniques. After time it was discovered that 
those patients that were taught how to relax tended to survive longer. 

Further trials have been carried out to monitor these levels of killer 
cells by using control groups where one group practised relaxation and 
the another group did not. The results have so far astounded 
researchers. These trials have not finished yet but results so far have 
shown that those patients who use relaxation and imagery techniques, in 
other words self-hypnosis, produce significantly greater amounts of killer 
cells and a much greater chance of survival. 

Although western scientists are reluctant to say, for the time being 
at least, that the mind alone is capable of curing cancer they are 
prepared to state that the state of your mind does have a pronounced 
effect on your susceptibility to an illness and its rate of progress. 

93 


They have discovered nerve fibres in the thymus, the immune 
system’s master gland, as well as in the spleen, the lymph nodes, and 
bone marrow. These are all essential parts of our immune system. These 
immune system cells have receptors for neuropeptides which are 
chemicals produced inside the brain. From this it would appear that the 
brain speaks directly to our immune system. 

HYPNOSIS OR MEDITATION? 

If you read about the history of hypnosis in most books you will no 
doubt be told about Doctor Mesmer, among others, as being the 
forefather of Hypnosis. Of course there has been a great deal of 
speculation as to what Hypnosis really is and how it affects our 
consciousness. 

The idea that we in the west are responsible for discovering the 
power and techniques of Hypnosis is to my mind a little arrogant to say 
the least. If you think about it hypnotic induction is in essence simply a 
means of accessing our subconscious mind. Hypnosis is a bit like an 
empty syringe which gains access to the mind instead of the blood 
stream. It is what you put in the syringe that is all important. 

In the west we have a great deal of experience in how to deal with 
numerous medical conditions through the use of hypnosis but we are 
almost totally unaware of its preventative uses in maintaining our health 
and strengthening our bodies immune system. In order to fully appreciate 
the true nature and possibilities that hypnosis offers us we must take the 
wider view, swallow our western pride and sense of superiority, and look 
to the east for help and advice. 

MEDITATION -ADVANCED TECHNIQUES. 

In the next section I want to discuss how you can use your trance 
sessions to improve your health and channel to power of your mind to 
boost the bodies natural defences. Before I can do this I must first give 
you a bit of background first. 

Mystics in the east have for thousands of years known of and 
learned how to access the power of the subconscious mind and have 
achieved states of human enlightenment and control of their physical 
bodies which baffle western science. 

94 


Of course the many techniques used in the east to enter trance 
state or induction, as we call it, come under the general heading of 
meditation. Many western hypnotists, both medical and even the stage 
variety, are aware of the different and flashier types of induction that can 
be used (I will discuss these at a later date). However western 
experience and knowledge is a fraction of what is known by some 
exponents in India, China, and of course in Tibet. 

Let me give you some examples which are fairly well known and 
documented in the west. In Tibet there are two particular techniques 
which have been widely learnt and practised for thousands of years. One 
is called (Jun g-gom) and the other is known as (tumo). 

The art of Lung-gom is where an adept is able to travel very 
rapidly across rugged ground sometimes travelling for distances of over 
three hundred miles in thirty hours day and night. This is a useful skill for 
people living in a very inhospitable part of the country where there are no 
roads to speak of. They don’t walk or run in any manner we would 
understand but appear to leap with great elasticity from one spot to 
another. While doing this the adept would be in a trance like state and 
would keep his vision focused upwards on the horizon. 

The training needed to master this technique would appear to 
most of us as very rigorous. It involves living in complete darkness and 
seclusion for over three years while practising deep breathing exercises 
and meditation techniques. This does seem almost barbaric to us but you 
have to understand to a Tibetan monk such practises are not unusual. 
They are accustomed to and are great experts in meditation. It is not a 
hardship in the way we would perceive it and I am told that this form of 
seclusion is not absolutely necessary, some can achieve similar results 
without going to such extremes. 

I watched a programme recently concerning the training that the 
Royal Marines have to go through in order to learn how to survive in the 
arctic wastes of Norway. Their training was very thorough, however I 
could not help think of those monks who train in isolated areas of Tibet in 
the art of Tumo. 

Tumo, translated as fire in the belly, is probably more widely 
practised than lung-gom and is the art of combating extreme cold. This is 
a very useful technique when we consider that Tibet is a country that is 
almost entirely over ten thousand feet. There is not much fuel to burn for 
fires although yak done is commonly used. 

The adepts train in a similar way to those that learn lung-gom in 
that they learn a range of complex breathing and meditative exercises 
and bathe daily in icy streams in the mountains. While in deep trance 
they sit naked in the snow and imagine or focus their mind on internal 
fires within their bodies. 

95 


When their training is complete the adepts have to under-go a test 
to see whether they have mastered their training. On a particularly windy 
night in the middle of winter they are led on to frozen lake whereupon a 
hole is made through the ice to the water below. A robe is then dipped in 
to the water until it is soaked. The adept then has to wear this robe and 
dry it by using their body heat generated by the powers of meditation. 
This process is repeated throughout the night until the master is satisfied 
that the adept has mastered this technique. 

This ability is not uncommon in the east. There was a prominent 
Indian guru Swami Brahmachari who was invited to Russia in 1966 to 
train Russian cosmonauts how to use breath control. On arriving in 
Moscow the weather was bitterly cold with a strong wind wiping across 
the airstrip. The Russian entourage where wearing thick overcoats, fur 
hats and gloves. When the doors of the aircraft opened the Indian 
stepped out and was only wearing a thin cotton suit he had on when he 
boarded the plan back in Deli. Upon reaching the ground the Russians 
tried to offer him a thick overcoat but he declined. The Indian simply 
stated “I produce my own heat thank you”. 

Tibet, India, and China have their own forms and techniques of 
combining breathing exercises and meditation. My own personal 
experience is with the Chinese forms so I want to explain a little about 
these. In any case it would be a little strange for me to try and explain 
how to use self-hypnosis to improve your health if I didn’t at least mention 
some of these techniques. It would be a bit like writing a book on How to 
drive without saying anything about braking or the use of the accelerator, 
also there is no point in trying to re-invent the wheel. The Chinese are 
masters in these matters and have vast experience which has been 
refined over a great many years. 

If you are serious about your health and want to get the most out 
of self-hypnosis some knowledge of these techniques will be invaluable 
to you. Even if you are not primarily interested in your health as such, 
some very simple breathing techniques will make self hypnosis sessions 
much more effective. They will help you to calm down after all the hassle 
of the day and enable you to focus your mind on what you are trying to 
do. For this reason alone it is worth your considering them. (It also 
enables you to be more selective about some of the more esoteric, 
crackpot, not mention dangerous, methods of alternative medicine which 
are becoming more fashionable). 

There is strong trend in the world today of combining the benefits 
of modern western technology with the holistic techniques traditionally 
favoured in the east. Countries like China, Korea, Taiwan, Japan and 
even Russia have realised that the western habit of treating the human 
body as some kind of 

96 


machine with increasingly expensive technology is not the way forward. 
By utilising the best of the tried and tested treatments developed in the 
east over many many years with the amazing diagnostic techniques 
produced in the west a new and very powerful kind of medicine is being 
developed. 

This pragmatic attitude towards medicine is producing a dramatic 
improvement in health care in those countries. At a fraction of the cost 
most Americans have to pay for their health care the Chinese 
government have been able to deliver effective medical care for a billion 
relatively impoverished people. 

Of course in the west there are powerful vested interests in 
promoting a purely allopathic chemical-mechanistic approach to 
medicine. Millions and millions of dollars are spent each year by 
pharmaceutical companies in developing more and more new drugs and 
costly treatments. General practitioners are routinely approached by 
salesmen from these companies to promote these new drugs to their 
patients. 

In the west we are partly to blame because we tend to wait until we are 

sick and develop a disease before we seek help. In the east it is the 

tradition to take preventive measures before our body succumbs to an 

illness. A well known quote from a classic Chinese medical text says:


Wise physicians do not treat a disease once its has developed but rather 

treat it before it manifests.They do not wait for symptoms to run out off 

control but treat them before they develop.Giving medicine once a 

disease is established is like digging a well after you are already dying of 

thirst. 

97 


(Qigong) or (Chi Kung)... 

In China people have traditionally been taught to take 
responsibility for their health and Qigong practise has been an essential 
part of this practise for thousands of years. 

Qigong can be translated as “energy working”. Qigong was first 
mentioned during the reign of the yellow emperor some 4000 years ago. 
At that time it was stated that the Qigong techniques were in turn handed 
down to them by the anciens. So it is very hard to know for certain how 
long Qigong has been practised in china but it could have been used for 
at least 6000 years. It is thought that Qigong started out as some form of 
callisthenics. Then around 500AD an eccentric monk from the Tantric 
school of Buddhism arrived from India and taught the Chinese the 
science of breathing called pranayama. This laid the foundation for the 
Chinese health and longevity exercises as well as their martial arts. 

The monk was called Bodhidharma and certainly an interesting 
character. (It is said he sliced off his own eye lids to stop himself from 
nodding off during the numerous meditations he practised.) Before he 
would teach the Chinese anything he insisted on retiring to a monastery 
for nine years of solitary meditation facing a stone wall “listening to the 
ants scream’? 

Qigong practise counters the many shocks and attacks our 
immune systems are exposed to on a daily basis. It switches the body’s 
autonomous nervous system over to parasympathetic mode. In other 
words it calms the system down and revitalises the vital organs, glands, 
and brain. It has a very strong effect upon the circulation of the blood. 
This in turn greatly increases the body’s ability to deliver many vital 
immune substances to all the tissues and cells and increases the rate 
that the body can take away the various waste products that accumulate 
there. 

The common denominator in all eastern cults is the stress they 
place on the importance of breathing. Ancient tomes on yoga state that 
“Life is in the breath” and they also believe that the body absorbs life 
force (Qi or Prana) from the air. Western scientists have discovered that 
flares in the skin will glow more brightly when subjects breath in pure 
oxygen indeed this effect is more marked if ionised air is used. One 
explanation of this phenomena is that surplus electrons from oxygen may 
provide fuel for our energy field. 

If the air we breathe does not contain abundant quantities of 
negative ions we rapidly feel tired and listless. During the space program 
extremely physically and mentally fit astronauts soon became exhausted 
after only a few hours in their space capsule. After many years research 
in to the problem they 

98 


finally discovered what was wrong. The space capsule, being wholly 
metal, is in effect a perfect faraday cage and so virtually contained no 
negative ions whatever. Once negative ion generators were filled to the 
space capsules the astronauts’ symptoms disappeared entirely. 

It is for reason that many modern factories and offices are 
equipped with negative ion generators. Air-conditioning, heating, and 
pollution will drastically deplete the airs natural supply off negative ions. 
The clean air in the country typically contains about three negative ions 
to each positive one. In a polluted Gity this ratio drops down to roughly 
one negative ion to 400 positive ions! 

Deep breathing is a vital part of Qigong practise. There are many 
styles of Qugong as you might imagine after such a long period of time. 
There are martial and non-martial forms. The most famous martial form 
is known as (Taijiquan or Tai Chi% Taijiquan is what is known as an 
internal style as opposed to an external style like karate or Taikondo 
which rely on muscular force. Taijiquan relies on yielding to an 
opponents attack and channelling that force against them. The Taiji 
adept use the intrinsic energy known as (Qi or Chi) which they learn to 
generate within their own bodies to defeat an attacker. Because the 
martial concepts used in Taiji are much deeper and more profound than 
most other styles it is much longer and harder to learn. However the 
more practise you do the better you will become and your defensive 
ability will actually improve with age not weaken which tends to be the 
case with an external form. 

Qi is a difficult word to translate because the Chinese have at 
least forty uses of the word however for our purposes you can think of it 
as a form of energy or life force. In China many believe that everything in 
the universe has an energy aura or field. This includes inanimate objects 
like rocks. Living creatures like animals, insects, and plants have a 
bigger energy field or life force than inanimate objects. 

In Chinese medicine it is thought that good health depends on the 
Qi being balanced, able to flow and circulate smoothly and 
uninterruptedly throughout the body. If the flow is interrupted and 
stagnates for some reason then illness will be the result and if it stops 
entirely there will be death. Water is often used as a way of describing 
what they mean, when water stops moving it stagnates and smells. 

The Chinese believe that the body has two circulatory systems. 
One that is known to western science is the blood circulation which is 
responsible for taking oxygen and nutrients to the cells in the body and 
carrying away waste products. The other system is the internal energy or 
Qi circulation which supplies the organs and cells of the body with vital 
energy. 

99 


The channels though which this life force flows are known as 
meridians. Despite what many western doctors believe these channels 
are not the same as our nerve networks or blood vessels. This is a fact 
that any Chinese doctor will vigorously confirm. There are twelve main 
pairs of Qi meridians in the body but I will not go in to all that now suffice 
to say you probably have the general idea. 

The circulation of Qi keeps every part of the body alive. Qi is 
sensitive to or affected by weather, the time of year, the food you eat, 
and your thoughts or mental health. 

The Chinese have being studying Qi for many thousands of 
years and it is their research that has enabled them to develop techniques 
like acupuncture and many other methods to strengthen and enhance the 
body and mind. The Chinese have tried to measure Qi using infrasound, 
low frequency amplitude-modulated infrared radiation, low- frequency 
magnetic information, particle flow information, visible or superfaint light, 
and organic ion flow, among others. 

When Qi is used for healing purposes they have noticed that 
there is a marked wave motion and undulation which can produce 
physiological changes and medical benefits. Tests with have shown that 
infrared radiation from the palms and fingers of a non-practitioner of 
Qigong does not have the same wave motion and undulation. The level 
of infrared heat radiation created by a Qigong master might only measure 
about a few tenths of a microwatt. This still puzzles researchers because 
the heat given off by infrared heat radiators currently on the market are a 
few tenths of a kilowatt, which represents a huge difference in 
magnitude. The energy given off by a Qigong master, although very faint, 
has a much stronger healing power. Some experiments have shown that 
Qi will penetrate lead plates and contains gamma ray wave bands. 

Scientists, with the aide of a extremely sensitive galvanometer, 
have been able to study and measure the electrical current at the various 
acupuncture points around the body. They discovered that these points 
gave unusually strong readings. By comparing the different readings of 
people in good health with those who were ill or very tired they 
discovered a difference of around six or seven micro-amperes. These 
figures are very significant when you consider the average healthy 
person would read about eight micro-amperes. 

One of the most important aspects of Chinese Taoist philosophy 
is that of balance and harmony in all things. Tao is often translated as 
“the way” or “the path”. The Chinese have long been avid students and 
observers of nature. It is always their wish to work in harmony with nature 
and not againstit. They believe that the universe consists essentially of 
two forces Yin and Yang. Examples of Yin and Yang are sometimes 
described as male and female, positive and negative, sweet and sour, 
hard and soft. In these examples Yin is soft and Yang is hard. 

100 


The first record of the terms Yin and Yang were made in “The 

Book of Change” about 1200 BC. The concept of Yin described as “a 
shady side of a hill” and Yang as “a sunny side of a hill”. These are useful 
images because they not only show the polarity of the two conditions 
they also give us the idea of change. As the earth rotates the sun’s 
shadow will move and what was cast in shadow will now be in the sun 
and what was in the sun will now be in shadow. What was Yin has 
become Yang and vice versa. The two states coexist in harmony with 
each other and are not in conflict. One cannot exist without the other they 
are relative to each other. For example you cannot have beauty unless 
there is ugliness to contrast it. 

In the west out philosophy is more dualistic. We tend to think in 
terms of absolute opposites, black and white, right and wrong etc. The 
Chinese this approach too rigid and in flexible. Flexibility is the key to 
Taoist thought. In Chinese martial arts this cyclic idea of hard and soft, 
yield and attack is vitally important. This belief permeates all their 
sciences from medicine to cooking and is known as the Great Principal. 
You may have seen the ancient symbol, shown here below in Fig 1, 
reflecting Yin and Yang. 


Fig 1. 


101 


Just as a good curative hypnotist will endeavour to find the root 
cause of a patient’s distress, a Chinese doctor will try to establish the 
root cause of a persons illness. He will not just treat the external 
symptoms. He will try to find out why there is an imbalance in their 
intrinsic energies and then balance them. In this way a patient will 
recover and their symptoms will disappear. 

If you have ever practises Qigong! Taiji you will already know that 
great care is taken to make sure that the exercises are balanced. You 
never just develop one side or part of the body but exercise it evenly. 

Natural Energy Fields:


Western science has established that the earth has its own 
geomagnetic field. Taoists have been aware that the earth has an 
electromagnetic field for probably six thousand years or more. They 
considered the sky to be the positive pole (yang) and the earth to have 
negative or (Yin) polarity. The resultant electromagnetic field that is 
generated is known as Qi. In Qigong training we as human beings are 
taught how to interact with this power. You learn how to harmonise the 
frequency of your own energy with that of the earth’s. 

From the western scientific point of view electric currents will generate 
magnetic fields around whatever is passing through, a wire for example. 
Dr Richard Broeringmeyer, who publishes Bio-Energy Health Newsletter, 
states “Life is not possible without electromagnetic fields, and optimum 
health is not possible if the electromagnetic fields are out of balance for 
long periods of time. Magnetic energy is natures energy in perfect 
balance.” 

The Chinese have known that fluctuations in the electromagnetic 
field of the earth effect us by influencing our own energy field . Western 
science has only just started to grudgingly recognise this fact and 
describe this phenomena in terms of “biorhythms”. Dr Bertram Brown of 
the US National Institute of Mental Health said:


“From the moment of conception until death, rhythm is as much part of 
our structure as our bones and flesh. Most of us are dimly aware that we 
fluctuate in energy, mood, well-being, and performance each day, and 
that there are longer, more subtle behavioural alterations each week, 
each month, season, and year. Through studies of biological rhythms, 
many aspects of human variability in symptoms of illness, in response to 
medical treatment, In learning, and job performance are being 
illuminated. Already, some of our changes of moods and vulnerability to 
stress and illness, our peaks of strength and productivity, can be 
foreseen……………………… 

102 


It is interesting to note that homing pigeons find their way by 

focusing on the earth’s magnetic field. They have crystals of magnetite 
on the surface of their brain which is a magnetic mineral. This substance 
enables a pigeon to locate its destination be in the dark of in thick fog. 

Apparently humans also have a quantity of magnetite behind the 
nasal passages just in front of the pituitary gland. This area has for 
centuries been highlighted by Taoist and Hindu adepts as the Upper 
Elixir Field or Celestial Eye. It is considered to be one of the most 
important centres of energy in the body and many Qigong exercises 
focus on enhancing this area. 

One essential differences between eastern philosophy and 
western thought is that the Chinese don’t separate the mind from the 
body, they strive to combine the mind body and spirit. 

The development of this philosophy enabled the Chinese to 
develop the most sophisticated and effective medical approach known 
for thousands of years. 

Western civilisation has comparatively recently developed its own 
medical knowledge and now boasts a vast array of impressive 
technological equipment. However the problem in the west is that we 
have concentrated on cure rather than prevention. We have tended to 
treat the symptoms rather than look at the root causes of an illness. 

The Chinese approach has always been much more holistic. They 
treat the body as a whole rather than just concentrate on one small part 
of it. To many western minds this approach seems very unscientific or 
unproved however a lot of doctors in the west are no longer able to 
ignore this approach and are now taking the Chinese approach more 
seriously. Acupuncture has been used in the west for quiet a few years 
now, but other traditional Chinese treatments are being studied. Even in 
China a great deal of scientific research is being carried out to try and 
find a “scientific” reason to explain why Qigong is so effective. 

In most hospitals in China you will find a Qigong master on the 
staff. It is common practise for doctors to use Qigong in conjunction with 
acupuncture for example. It is now a matter of record that a Qigong 
master, after years of training, can send his energy or Qi from his body to 
a patients. This might sound a bit far fetched to some of you but I would 
ask you to bear with me. 

103 


What the master does is send his energy into to patient along the 
same meridian channels used by the acupuncturist. Such is the success 
of this technique that the Chinese authorities are carrying out a great 
deal of research and trying to look much deeper into this process. This is 
far more subtle than simply sending a small electrical current into a 
patient current through acupuncture needles which has also been tried. 

Taoist philosophy represents the longest period of scientific 
research into health and longevity on record. Taoists view the human 
entity as the universe in microcosm. They believe we are inexplicably 
connected with the powers and energies of the universe. This kind of 
thinking is creeping into the more esoteric areas of western scientific 
thought. Nuclear physicists studying quantum theory would find that their 
own theories about matter and the nature of the universe have uncanny 
similarities with those of the ancient Taoists. 

In this day and age it is vital that we take a much greater 
responsibility for our own health and well being. We cannot necessarily 
rely on western medicine to keep us healthy. Every day there is one 
health scare after another. If it is not BSE it is something else. 

Much more worrying is the emergence off so called superbugs. 
These are bugs which seem to be immune to all known antibiotics. Such 
bugs are particularly dangerous to people with low or damaged immune 
systems. In the west we are vulnerable because our medicine relies so 
heavily on antibiotics to fight infections. Doctors have often been 
criticised for dishing out prescriptions of antibiotics to all and sundry on 
demand. It is even feared that basic hygienic practises in hospitals are 
neglected because any infections caused can and are readily treated 
with antibiotics. Antibiotics are known to have a debilitating effect on our 
bodies natural immune system anyway! 

It is indiscriminate use of these drugs which has caused the 
problem. There are already strains of tuberculosis which are resistant to 
any known antibiotic. These strains kill many people each year and it is 
feared that we may return to the grim old days of the 1920’s when people 
had to be put into isolation hospitals until they recovered or died. 

Farmers even use antibiotics on farm animals to promote 
unnatural growth. So serious is the problem that the House of Lords 
Select Committee on Health and Technology have recommended that 
the routine use of antibiotics on farms should be banned. So what can 
we do? 

104 


How to heal yourself by moving energy (Qi) 
around your body. 

Mind is the leader of Qi (energy). Where the mind goes, Qi follows. 
When a certain part of the body is sick, use the mind to draw Qi to the affected 
area and it will correct the condition. Dr chang Rui, director of the imperial medical 
institute Sung Dynasty AD 1127-1279. 

Anyone who has practised Qigong will have experienced the 
feeling of heat being generated within the body. Some mistakenly think 
that this heat is QL The feelings and sensations of heat are in actual fact 
an indication of Qi being present within the body or circulating within the 
body but not Qi itself It is rather like testing a wire to see if there is an 
electric current passing through it. Unless you use a volt meter, or detect 
heat coming from the wire, or observe some other phenomenon like the 
presence of a magnetic field, you will not know whether there is electricity 
present in the wire or not. 

Heat and magnetism are manifestations of the flow of electric 
current but are not electric current in themselves. It is the same thing with 
Qi. You will be aware of its existence within your body by monitoring and 
being aware of your bodies reaction to it and the symptoms it produces 
like heat and feelings of tingling or pins and needles within your limbs. 

Now if you have been regularly practising Self-Hypnosis you will 
no doubt have experienced some very pleasant sensations flowing 
through your body. These sensations are manifestations of Qi or life 
force. 

In general it is possible to generate Qi in two ways. First is to 
generate it externally by stimulating different parts of the body through 
doing special physical exercises, massage, acupressure, and 
acupuncture. 

The second way is by generate it internally. One method of doing 
this is by practising some breathing patterns or exercises. There are so 
many exercises to chose from it would easily take many courses to 
describe them all. However I think it is important to give you a broader 
picture of what is available. I will give you some simple exercises later on 
however I hope some of you may wish to explore these areas further on 
your own. The subject is really so vast and beyond the scope of this 
course. 

105 


The second way to generate energy is by using the mind while in 
meditation or, from our point of view, a trance state. 

Once you have established a light trance state, either sitting or 
lying down, let you mind relax and experience the pleasant sensations 
going through your body. There may be different feelings each time you 
try this, it does not matter. If you experience waves and tingles of heat, or 
pins and needles don’t try and interfere with them just feel were they 
want to flow to. These feelings often start in the extremities like the feet, 
hands in general or palms of the hand. This is just the bodies energy 
flowing through the meridians. 

Moving Qi:


In order to move Qi you must put your mental intention in front of 
it. In other words if you can sense Qi in your feet an calf area of your leg 
just gently let your mind go to the area around your knees and imagine 
you feel the sensation there. In a very short time you will feel the tingly 
feeling grow and move to this area. 

WARNING! 


If you have a particular problem, say a stiff neck or pain in the 
shoulder, after a little while you can start to learn how to direct this 
energy to the area in pain. However you should not move the Qi straight 
from your feet to the neck in one swoop. If you do this you will probably 
feel a great surge of energy which will rush up into the head. A bit like a 
sudden rush of blood to the brain. This can cause discomfort and even 
lead to a mild head ache. It won’t do you any harm though. It is better to 
learn to move Qi around the body in small stages. 

So if you wanted to move Qi from the feet to the neck it would be 
best to start by letting it rise to the knees then move it gently up into to 
the hips/stomach and gradually through your chest into the affected area. 

Once you have collected the energy in the right area just let it rest 
there. You can now imagine your body healing itself and rebuilding 
damaged cells or sore muscles. After a while let the Qi move and go 
where it wants to naturally. If you are perfectly healthy the Qi will move 
wherever it is needed. Your mind and body knows what is best. However 
a little experimenting now and again is good fun. Next month I will give a 
some other ideas on meditation and moving Qi but this will do for now. 
