How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind!! 


Part One 
Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


1 

PART ONE: 


“The biggest block to any man’s success is found in his head” 

I am very pleased to welcome you to “How To Tap The Incredible Secret 
Power Of Your Own Mind”. I know you are going to find enrolling on this 
course one of the most important steps you have ever taken. 

The above statement may seem a hard one to live up to, nevertheless it is one 
I fully intend to try. 

It is my intention to show you how you can take control of your own mind and 
therefore your own life from this point onwards. By learning the art of Hypnosis 
and Self Hypnosis you will be able to mould your life the way you want it. 

Many who have gone before you were staggered by how their lives 
could have been so utterly changed for the better simply spending just twenty 
very relaxing and pleasant minutes twice a day. The idea that something so 
simple can be so rewarding is hard to understand until you have experienced 
it. 

You will learn:


How you can develop the unique talents, powers, and abilities, 
that we all possess, to undreamed of heights. 

How to become rich and successful. and get anything you want from life. 

How you can increase your powers of concentration, memory, or 
physical stamina. 

How to control and eradicate any fears or phobias that spoil and disrupt 
your life and prevent you from enjoying your life to the full. For example fear of 
flying, fear of insects, of enclosed spaces, or whatever, the list goes on and 
on. 

Smoking is one of the few vices that can be cured with one course of 
Hypnosis! Think of all that money you could save each year if you gave up not 
to mention the improvement in your health, more breath and energy, better 
taste of food etc. 

2 


How to give up smoking and make £130,000 in the process! Let us 
assume the average smoker spends £3.00 per day. That comes to £21.00 per 
week and £1092 per year. Lets assume a smoker gives up and instead puts 
the money they would have spent on cigarettes into a building society account 
at say 8% interest. After twenty years they would have amassed £54,000. That 
is enough to give them a £450 a month income for life. It that person was 
twenty when they gave up in they would have a staggering £134,000 in the 
account by the time they reached fifty. 

How to lose weight. There is a vast industry selling the public one new 
diet plan after another which seldom work. All that dieting does is lead people 
to overeat again. After an initial time the weight might drop off but soon goes 
up again later, and the whole miserable cycle starts all over again. Would you 
like to know how to lose weight and maintain that perfect figure? 

How to improve your golf handicap or your tennis swing. 

How to give confident public speeches. 

How to become more popular and make friends easily. 

How to improve your love and sex life! 

In short anything you want from life is yours for the taking and 
you are going to be shown how to get it in simple easy steps! 

I know that to those of you who have not had any experience of 
Hypnosis and its amazing power for good in our lives might feel that you have 
read some pretty fanciful claims. They must be too good to be true. Pie in the 
sky? 

Scientific research at the UCLA has established that we only use a tiny 
percentage of our true mental ability. Early this century scientists believed 
humans only used about 10% of their brain! Today scientists believe we use 
less than 2%. 

Let me assure you right here and now that those claims are only a 
fraction of what you can do as a human being. Merely the tip of the iceberg. In 
America at “Cray Research” they have been carrying out research using a 
combination of very powerful computers and Hypnosis. Using such advanced 
techniques they have been able to prove that the human brain can absorb 
information at phenomenal speeds. Some subjects have been able to process 
more than 690,000 words per minute! (More on this at later date.) 

3 


As a human being you are empowered with talents and abilities that 
you probably never dreamed of. Did you know that your subconscious mind 
can deal with over 2,000,000 different pieces of information per second. 

Most people go through life without ever having tapped a minuscule 
amount of their true potential as human beings. You on the other hand have 
shown that you want to learn how to take control of your life and steer it 
around in the direction you want it to go. You want to improve the quality of 
your life and live it to the utmost of your ability! 

It never ceases to maze me that most people live out their lives in 
“Quiet desperation”, to quote Oscar Wilde, only to end their lives in bitter 
resentment and anger thinking of what might have been if only they had had 
the breaks and chances others seem to have. 

I find it very sad that many people are content to base the future 
happiness of their lives on the random selection of a few ping pong balls falling 
out of a lottery machine every Saturday night! They prefer to throw a few 
pounds away every week on a fourteen million to one chance which they know 
they will never win rather than actually do something about improving their 
lives. And even if they do win this money there is no guarantee that money 
alone is going to make them happy and feel fulfilled in their life as many have 
discovered. After all there are only so many meals you can eat, houses you 
can live in, cars you can drive, etc. 

Do you really know what it is you want from life. I mean 
really know? 

If you just want money and other material riches then that is no problem 
you will be shown how to get them. lt’s relatively easy! You will be shown how 
to programme your mind to tap your vast creative resources and put them to 
work for you. But I hope you will gain much much more from this course than 
just money. If not then I will feel that I have badly let you down. 

Maybe you want to increase your ability drastically to retain facts and 
information so as to get a first class honours degree. Perhaps you want to 
master several foreign languages. Or maybe you want to perfect your 
technique at tennis, football, snooker, or at playing the piano. 

Perhaps you want to be more patient with your family. Be a calmer 
driver. Be a better lover. Get less stressed when problems arise. Look 
younger, lose weight, get fit and trim. Be more popular and make more friends. 

4 


Be the best in your field! Dramatically improve your health. Become 
resilient against illness. Reduce or eliminate pain. (Even reduce and cure 
cancer). Yes Hypnosis has been, in some cases, successful in treating a 
number of incurable diseases like cancer! 

In short anything you want The only limit is that of your 
own imagination. 

You will be taught how your mind works and how to programme it to help you 
to get the best life has to offer you! This course is in part a kind of owners 
instruction manual for your own mind! 

Believe me you are about to start out on a fantastic journey of discovery 
which will change your whole view of life. The really amazing thing is it is so 
easy to turn your life around. It really is if only you are just shown how. 

THE POWER OF HYPNOSIS: 


Hypnosis is probably one of the most misunderstood phenomenon in 
our lives today. Hypnosis has long been associated with mumbo-jumbo, 
occult and sinister mystery men bent on controlling your mind. Despite the 
proof that exists about the remarkably positive effects of Hypnosis it is widely 
shunned and ignored by many people. 

There are many reasons for this not least the recent spate of TV programmes 
showing stage hypnotists making ordinary members of the audience look 
complete fools for our entertainment! 

I would like to state for the record that I am totally opposed to public 
displays of Hypnosis for entertainment. Most professional Hypnotists, who 
use their skills and knowledge to help people, consider stage shows as a bit 
like watching a surgeon culling off someone’s leg for the amusement of an 
audience! 

The problem is that the stage Hypnotist will inevitably be more 
concerned with the audiences reaction first and the condition and welfare of 
their participant second. There is very little similarity between a Professional 
Hypnotist and a stage hypnotist. Just as there is little similarity between a 
butcher and a surgeon. 

5 


In any case It is estimated that a stage Hypnotist can only really work 
with less than 2% of the population. Despite what the audiences may think 
even those people he eventually selects for the show will only co-operate with 
him as far as they really want to. 

A Hypnotist cannot make someone do anything against 
his wishes! 

I know the above statement might seem hard to believe after what you 
may have seen on TV or in a live stage show. People watching others on 
stage making fools of themselves think that those people have been taken 
over. They think that the hypnotist has complete control which is not possible. 

Having said this hypnosis is without doubt a very powerful tool. I dare 
say in the wrong hands it could conceivably be used for evil, however you 
have to get things into perspective. As I have said before I have never come 
across a case of harm being caused by the proper use of hypnosis. From my 
point of view I believe everyone should be taught how use hypnosis and in 
particular self-hypnosis. 

You see a stage hypnotist is in effect working with people who are 
prepared to go along with him and accept his suggestions. This is the whole 
essence of what hypnosis is anyway, as you will come to learn as you go 
through this course. 

Typically what a stage Hypnotist will do is ask the audience to put their 
hands together and then make the suggestion that they cannot pull them 
apart. About two or three percent will go alone with this suggestion and so he 
now has a few people who are very suggestive. After a few minutes of work 
with them he will reject a few more until he has enough suitable people for his 
act. What he is really looking for are those people who secretly want a chance 
to go up on stage but until now have not had the opportunity or courage. They 
will do what the Hypnotist wants, and make fools of themselves, because in 
their mind they put the blame on the hypnotist. This is known as the “social 
compliance theory”. 

This kind of thing simply makes people fear the phenomenon which is 
hypnosis and therefore ignore its potential and amazing power for good. 

I know of someone who suffers badly from psoriasis. She has been 
hospitalised once and has to endure repeated sun bed treatments, which are 
harmful to the body in the long run, and powerful dangerous drugs which can 

only be given so many times in a patient’s life time. If only she realised that 

6 


hypnosis could probably cure her with NO harmful side effects what-so-ever! I 
wish the same could be said of conventional treatments she currently has to 
endure. 

I mentioned to her that Hypnosis has had particularly good results with 
cases of psoriasis and other skin disorders. Unfortunately her local priest had 
put her oft, saying that hypnosis would expose her to satanic powers! Sad but 
true. This woman has to go around in long trousers and long sleeved blouses 
all summer even when temperatures are up in the high eighties. 

Obviously you are an open minded person and are not swayed by 
superstition or ignorance otherwise you would not have enrolled on this 
course. 

Let me just say to you that you already have inside 
you all that you will ever need to get what you want from 
life! 

As a Hypnotist of many years experience I find it a great shame when 
people close their minds to something which could be of real significance in 
their lives. From a purely medical point of view Hypnotherapy offers a 
completely safe natural way of dealing very effectively with a wide range of 
complaints without resorting to drugs and other invasive methods. 

Let me just give you a brief list of what kind of things Hypnosis 
can do:


1. Give you an easy and powerful way of getting the skills and 
abilities you require in your job. 
2. It can enable you to reprogram your mind to think positively and 
steer yourself towards your goals (Whatever they might be). 
3. It can be used to find out what it is you really want from life. That 
is to say what it is you want and not what someone else wants. 
4. It can help you to remove the shackles from the past that limit 
you from achieving your true potential. 

5. It can be used to greatly reduce stress in your life. 
6. It can be used to build self-confidence. 
7. As I have already said It can be used to treat Phobias. 
7 


8. It can be used to help people stop smoking or reduce eliminate a 
person s dependence on alcohol or other drugs. 
9. It can be used to cut off pain in dentistry, child birth. 
10. It can be used to treat conditions like asthma, psoriasis, exema, 
and other skin disorders. 
11. It can even be used to improve a person’s eyesight. Some 
people with short-sightedness, myopia, have had their eyesight 
improved under Hypnosis by more than 50%. 
In fact from a medical point of view hypnosis can be used in a vast 
number of conditions and ailments. 

The use of Hypnosis was very popular in the late nineteenth early 
twentieth century. When the great Russian composer Sergei Rachmaninov 
became depressed and unable to concentrate on his music he, in despair, 
sought the help of an eminent Doctor in Moscow by the name of Dr Nikolai 
DahI. 

Rachmaninov had become very depressed because he had received 
some bad reviews of one of his recent works. He was treated under Hypnosis 
and given suggestions of relaxation and for relief of his mental “block”. At the 
right time the Doctor gave him positive feelings of well being and confidence 
which were fed into his sub conscious mind. 

With his powers of concentration revived and increased and the 
restoration of his confidence he soon went on to compose one of the greatest 
works in his career, the piano concerto No 2 in C minor. So grateful was 
Rachmaninov in recognition of the Doctors efforts, he dedicated this work to 
Doctor Dahl. 

8 


SICKNESS/ HEALTH 


It is a widely held belief that if you don’t have your health you don’t 
have anything! 

After all what is the point of having all the money and wealth in the 
world if you are not fit or healthy enough to enjoy it? 

I don’t want to go into specific medical complaints at this stage but 
would rather prefer to discuss health in more general terms. Most physicians 
will admit that most if not all illnesses have a psychological element to them. 
That is to say the mind has an important role to play in the cause and cure of 
any illness. 

Some physicians define psychosomatic illnesses as those which have 
no apparent physical cause. Perhaps someone complaining about a terrible 
pain in the leg goes to the doctor who X-rays it and makes other tests but can 
find no physical reason for the pain. Nowadays many doctors and psychiatrists 
include illnesses which are physical in nature but are caused by the mind. 

Re-educating your mind to help your mind and body become more 
healthy is the most logical first step to take. Of course defining what healthy 
means can be a little confusing and depends on your philosophical stance. I 
hope to give you some useful pointers at a later stage. 

Sickness can be, and often is, caused by excessive stress that 
accumulates in the system. Stress is considered a number one killer in the 
western world. It manifests itself in many ways the most common being heart 
attacks, strokes and the development of cancer or other life threatening 
diseases. 

Our modern hectic pace of life today exposes us to many more 
pressures than perhaps our predecessors had to deal with. Obviously life is 
easier in material ways but it is the speed and pace that has changed. I 
personally believe the telephone has a lot to answer for, let alone the fax 
machine and mobile phone. Nowadays people can be contacted by anyone 
anywhere twenty four hours a day. It is almost impossible to escape and find a 
little peace. 

Stress at its most extreme level is a fight-or-flight reaction to a 
potentially threatening situation. In times gone by it would have been triggered 

9 


If we found ourselves facing a ferocious lion or a pack of wolves. What 
happens is the brain sends out a message of alarm which in turn releases a 
flood of adrenaline which speeds through the bloodstream and utterly 
overturns the normal routine of the body. 

Most of the time our cells are preoccupied with renewal of themselves. 
About 90% of each cell’s energy is taken up with the vital task of building 
proteins and creating new DNA and RNA. However when the brain thinks 
there is a threat this process is set aside so that it can ensure your body has 
enough energy to propel your muscles to either fight of fly from the scene and 
get yourself out of danger. In order to do this the anabolic metabolism changes 
over to catabolic metabolism which, far from rejuvenating your cells, actually 
breaks them down. 

When the body introduces adrenaline into the blood stream it causes a 
whole host of reactions within the body. For example it causes the blood 
pressure to rise, muscles to tense, breathing to become shallow, digestion to 
stop, among many other things. Of course as a temporary defence mechanism 
it is vital but if this condition is not stopped in time the effects on our body can 
be disastrous. 

The reasons for stress can be many and varied but hypnosis has been 
shown to be a very powerful method of combating it. I do not want to give the 
impression that by eliminating stress you will avoid all illnesses. This would be 
foolhardy. However being able to remain calm in stressful situations is 
obviously a useful if not a vital aim and one which we will look at first. 

It is never the circumstances which cause our bodies to react in a 
stressful way but how we perceive those circumstances or events. To some 
people being stuck in a traffic jam for an hour can be incredibly stressful while 
others simply take it in their stride. There was an interesting study carried out 
at Harvard fifty years ago were the health of 180 or so students was monitored 
for forty years. It was found that even those who were perfectly healthy in their 
youth were likely to die prematurely if they had a tendency to react poorly to 
stress. 

Learning to achieve a relaxed state or peace of mind is of great even 
vital importance if you want to get everything you want from life. 

Your mind is a very complex piece of machinery. You could liken it to 
an extremely sophisticated computer. 

Your brain works best when it is left to work in a relaxed atmosphere. 
Boxers know, as do the great Taijiquan masters of China, that getting angry in 

a fight is a recipe for disaster. Anger, which is a form of stress, clouds the 

10 


judgement and causes us to make mistakes. 

The old saying “you die if you worry and you die if you don’t, so why 
worry?” is a very true. In fact you are more likely to die before your time if 
you do worry. 

Learning to relax is one of the keys to Hypnosis and most practitioners 
begin by getting their clients to enter a relaxed state. So a little later you will 
learn some simple techniques that will get you to relax and so make you more 
responsive to Hypnosis. 

11 


WHAT IS HYPNOSIS? 


One definition of Hypnosis I came across described as:


“An altered state of awareness effected by total concentration on the voice of the 

therapist. it will result in measurable physical, neurophysiological and psychological 

changes which may produce distortion of emotion, sensation, image and time. “ 

This sounds a bit of a mouth full but don’t worry entering into a “trance state” 
is very simple, natural, and very pleasant. As the course progresses you will 
learn more about the technical background of Hypnosis but for the time being 
this is not necessary. 

Believe it or not all of us go into a kind of hypnotic trance state at least twice a 
day. Once just before we drift off to sleep and similarly just before we wake up 
in the morning. It’s that twilight and very enjoyable stage between actual sleep 
and the waking state. 

Even daydreaming could be described as a form of self-hypnosis. After all we 
seldom know how much time elapses during a daydream. 

Simply put most scientists believe the human mind can be split into two 
different entities. One being the conscious mind and the other the subconscious 
or unconscious mind. 

The conscious mind predominately deals with analytical problems on a 
day to day basis. It responds to information it receives by processing it and 
categorising it according to its view of life. For example if someone told you 
that father Christmas was having a cup of tea in the next room your conscious 
mind would reject this as impossible. We all know father Christmas only 
drinks coffee. No seriously the conscious mind obviously does not believe in 
father Christmas and will not accept this statement at face value. It filters the 
suggestion and rejects it. This is known as the critical factor. 

The subconscious mind is far bigger and does not have a critical factor 
as such. It is the subconscious mind that keeps your heart beating and gets 
you to fill your lungs with air without you having to make any conscious effort 
to do it. If you reach out for a cup of coffee your conscious mind makes the 
decision to do so but it is the sub-conscious mind that gives all the myriad of 
instructions to all the muscles involved to bring the cup up to your lips. 

12 


The subconscious mind is an incredibly complex kind of computer with 
a huge memory bank. Basically everything you do or have done in your life is 
stored there. The memory of every sound you have heard, everything you may 
have smelled, tasted, or touched. Your brain retains all this information and it 
is never forgotten unless you suffer some form of brain damage. 

Under Hypnosis you can recall memories of your early childhood which 
your conscious mind has forgotten totally. Your subconscious mind draws on 
this giant memory bank to solve problems by accessing the information stored 
there. When you are mulling over one problem and the answer to a totally 
separate problem suddenly pops into your mind this is when your 
subconscious mind is at work. It never ever sleeps and is constantly working 
for you. 

The Israeli police force have used Hypnosis to get accurate details of a 
crime from witnesses. Sometimes people are able to remember the number 
plates of cars parked in an area a few weeks before a bank robbery. In one 
instance, under Hypnosis, some witnesses were able to produce accurate 
descriptions of the occupants who were seen drinking cups of coffee while 
observing a bank from across the street several days before a robbery. This 
information may not have appeared important at the time but their 
subconscious still stored it away. 

One of the most important jobs of the subconscious is to control and 
regulate the involuntary functions of your body. The pace your heart beats at, 
your blood pressure, your rate of breathing, your digestion, and much more, 
are all controlled by your subconscious mind. It is for this reason that Hypnosis 
is such a powerful tool in dealing with psychosomatic illnesses since it can be 
used to influence your subconscious mind to reduce stress and high blood 
pressure. 

(Of course anyone with health problems should get a 
competent medical diagnosis and proper treatment. If you 
have food poisoning or a serious infection Hypnosis may help 
speed up your recovery but you may need a dose of strong 
antibiotics.) 

Emotions: 


The subconscious mind is where your emotions are held. If you like it is 
the real you. If you think about it is our emotions that control the strength of 
our desires and this is why our subconscious mind will always control our 
conscious mind since our desires govern our behaviour. Our subconscious 

13 


computer has been programmed since birth to believe and behave in a 
certain way according to the image it has of you. This is why an alcoholic 
knows full well consciously that his over drinking is doing himself great 
harm he will continue to drink because his subconscious mind has some 
hidden reason to make him do so. If our subconscious minds have been 
programmed badly then our thoughts, decisions and actions will be bad for 
us and as a result our lives. Our subconscious mind cannot discriminate or 
analyse what it is told and will believe anything the conscious mind believes 
and allows through. 

You know this to be true because when you dream at night and find 
yourself being chased down 22nd street in New York by a two hundred foot 
pink blancmange, (you mean you don’t ?), its your subconscious mind at 
work. Obviously your conscious mind would reject the idea out of hand but the 
subconscious mind accepts it without question. 

Imagination:


The subconscious is where our imagination is housed. Our imagination is governed to 
some extent by our early life experiences. Our upbringing and experiences as children 
are of vital importance to the way we perceive ourselves later in life. Our imagination 
is coloured by those experiences. Imagination is a very useful tool when programming 
the subconscious. There is an interesting theoretical experiment I came across many 
years ago used to describe how our conscious minds cannot overrule our subconscious 
mind. It went something like this:


Put a twelve foot by half afoot plank of wood on the ground and walk along 
it to the end This would be quiet easy to do because your subconscious mind finds 
no objection to your doing this. Now put the same plank between the roofs of two 
four storey buildings and try to walk across it again. You will find yourself filled 
with apprehension because your subconscious mind will make you imagine that you 
could fall. In fact if you attempted to cross you probably would fall! This is despite 
the fact that your logical conscious mind knows it is the same plank of wood you 
walked across before quiet safely. 

Under Hypnosis if your subconscious was told that you could cross the 

14 


plank perfectly safely and it was convinced of this then you would be able to 
do so easily and safely. 

Creativity:


All creativity is found in the subconscious mind. It is where the great artists, 
composers, scientists, and inventors draw on their inspiration. Many great 
men have said that they carried out some of their greatest works while in a 
kind of trance state or day dream. Mozart, one of the most intuitive composers 
in history, claimed his compositions were formed in his mind like 

dreams independent of his will. ln fact the list can go on and on Isaac Newton, 
Coleridge, Goethe etc. 

It is the subconscious mind that gives us the drive to push us through 
life towards our goals. If you do not decide what those goals should be then it 
will select them for you. This is why you should know how to direct your 
subconscious mind in the direction YOU want to go and not the other way 
round. Without guidance it can direct you in the wrong direction towards 
illness, failure, and a wasted life, even self destruction, based on faulty 
programming from the past. It has enormous power and always achieves 
what it sets out to. 

Anyone who has made a success in their life be it as a famous opera singer, 

Olympic athlete, highly paid entrepreneur, or whatever have chosen to make 

that success their goal. It does not make any difference how the goal got 

there that fact remains that in every case their subconscious mind will have 

been there to give them the inspiration and dynamic energy to push them 

forward. Those who allow their path to be frustrated by distractions like 

jealousy, anger, or resentment will find their task a lot harder and may even 

fail. Many very capable people seem to get so close to success only to throw 

it all away at the last minute, these people have been programmed to fail and 

it happens time after time. 

The fact is whatever we are in life and whatever we achieve is 
governed by the view and aspirations our subconscious mind has of 
ourselves. Even if we just want to do nothing at all but stay in bed all day this 
goal has been buried in our minds somehow and from somewhere. This is a 
big subject and it will be covered at a later date. 

Remember your subconscious mind is like a guided missile except it 
will always hit the target it is programmed for. This is why you should make it 
the servant and not the master of your destiny. The subconscious mind is not 
meant to reason but to react to the instructions you give it. It is actually meant 
to serve you that is its role. If you are not happy in life then it is time for you to 
put that right NOW. It is time you started calling the shots! 

The fact is that the energy within you can be harnessed for your own 
good or it can be turned against you. With Self-Hypnosis you can ensure that 

15 


this incredible power within you can be directed for your own good and 
personal development. 

In order to use Hypnosis it is necessary to be able to talk to and 
influence the sub-conscious mind unhindered. ln order to do this we have to 
be able to go into what is known as a trance state. 

The trance state enables us to relax or distract the conscious mind so 
that the statements and instructions intended for the subconscious mind do 
not get analysed and rejected by the conscious mind. There are a large 
number of methods used by Hypnotists to help people into trance and we 
shall cover these in detail during the course. However the most common 
method used is the relaxation method. This is where you, if you are using 
Self-Hypnosis, or the Hypnotist gets you to relax so deeply that the conscious 
mind is not interested in the messages being sent to the subconscious mind. 
It cannot be bothered to interfere because it is enjoying the beautiful relaxed 
state it is in. 

By suspending the critical factor or occupying it elsewhere the 
Hypnotist can implant positive helpful suggestions into the sub-conscious 
without interference. See fig one and fig two below:


In Normal Waking State:


Fig 1: 

Suggestion Conscious mind 

Subconscious mind 

hears suggestion and 

made to a 

does not hear 


analyse it according 
person’s 

suggestions.

to its beliefs and 

subconscious. 

rejects it. 

In Hypnotic Trance State:


Fig2: 

Conscious mind 
does not register Subconscious mind 
suggestion. registers suggestion 

Suggestion 

and accepts and acts 

made to a 

upon it. 

person’s 
subconscious. 


15 



Hypnosis has proved very useful in dealing with people with serious 
burns. By putting a person into trance and suggesting that their arm is 
cooling down much of the blistering and inflammation can be reduced and so 
lead to a much quicker healing process. Obviously that person’s feeling of 
pain can be reduced. This would be difficult to achieve if the conscious mind 
was up and running. After all it saw the arch welder burn the arm and it 
logically knows it must hurt like hell!! 

Some people have been Hypnotised into believing that an ordinary coin 
placed on their arm was red hot. When the coin was removed the body 
produces a blister in response to the mental image. This is despite the fact 
that in reality the coin was cold and that no pain was actually experienced. 

Your first task is to learn how to induce a simple trance state in yourself 
Please don’t worry it is totally safe and even very good for you. If you have 
ever practised any sort of meditation then you have already learnt how to 
induce at trance state. Meditation be it transcendental or otherwise is simply a 
form of Self Hypnosis by a different name. 

17 


RELAXATION EXERCISES:


What follows is not a specific Hypnotic technique but merely a very 
simple relaxation exercise. It is very very simple but extremely effective at 
calming you down and relieving tension. Don’t be fooled by its apparent 
simplicity. Without going into all the physical details this little exercise alone 
can greatly help you reduce much muscular tension in the shoulders and neck 
and will help relax you ready for going into a trance. 

Step One:


Sit comfortably on a stool or low backed chair. Now take ten slow deep 
breaths to calm down your system and put more oxygen into your blood. If 
possible try to breath from the abdomen. When you expel the stale air from 
your lungs bring you stomach in. When inhaling count in your mind up to six, 
but if that seems too long hold it for about five or whatever you feel 
comfortable with, and hold for a maximum count of twenty. Then exhale 
slowly counting up to ten. 

Step Two:


1).Gently hold your head up in an upright and central position. Now slowly tip 
your head forward towards your chest as far as it will comfortably go and hold 
for a count of ten. 

2). Now gently tip your head back slightly and hold for a count of ten. 

3). Now you will tip your head forward again like you did before but this time 
slightly move it to your right and hold for ten and then return to the central 
position. 

4). Once you have done this repeat part 1,2, and 3 but this time tilt your head 
slightly to the left. 

Step Three:


1). Repeat step one. Take ten slow deep breaths. While you inhale count up 
to six, or whatever you are comfortable with, and hold for a maximum count of 
twenty. 

2). Again with your head in an upright position tip your head slowly to the left 
so that your left ear moves towards your left shoulder and hold for a count of 

18 


ten. 
3). Now repeat this process but move your head down to the right. 


Step Four:


1). Repeat step one. 
2). From your central position turn your head slowly to the left as far as you 


can without discomfort so that you can see over your shoulder. Now hold for a 
count of ten. 
3). Now return to the centre. 
4). Repeat the exercise but this time move the head to the right. 
5). Repeat part 1,2,3 &4. 
6). Repeat step one. 
7). Finally now Relax. 


Hopefully by now you will feel a bit more relaxed. You may find that you 
hear and feel some strange crunching noises at first. Don’t be alarmed these 
will go after a week or so however if you are experiencing pain then stop the 
exercises and see a doctor. 

Try to do these exercises twice a day once in the morning after your 
shower or bath and once in the evening or afternoon. 

After a few days go on to the next section which will teach you how to 
go into a relaxed and beautiful trance. 

19 


GOING INTO TRANCE:


Going into trance or Self-Hypnosis is a natural ability we all possess to 
a greater or lesser degree. The ease and ability to go into trance will vary from 
one person to another however we can all learn to be better at it with practise 
and a little time. We all have the ability to use our senses. I have a friend who 
is in the wine trade and he has developed an uncanny ability to distinguish 
between one type of wine from another. He can tell you what processes have 
been used, what country the wine is from, what grape variety, even from what 
vineyard the wine has come from, and he can sometimes what the vintage is. 

Self-Hypnosis is an ability we all have and not something people with 
special or unique powers can do. Believe it or not you are expected to use this 
ability which in most people sadly lies dormant. The cultural traditions of many 
eastern countries are far more aware than we are in the west and meditation is 
a way of life for many. Meditation is another general term to describe Self-
Hypnosis. 

The important thing to remember about Hypnosis is that you cannot 
force it. It is not like doing press-ups in the gym or training for the marathon. I 
heard about a colleague who had a sixty-year-old businessman for a client. 
This person did not want to work every day anymore since he felt he wanted to 
spend more of his time on his hobbies and family. His business was 
performing well but he needed to keep his hand on the tiller and come up with 
new ideas from time to time otherwise his competitors would get the better of 
him. The trouble was the harder he tried to come up with new and novel ideas 
for the business the more difficult and frustrated he became. These 
frustrations were beginning to cause him health problems and so he sought 
help. 

The Hypnotist told him to work at his office from 9.OQam until 1 .OOpm 
then have a break for lunch. When he returned to the office in the afternoon he 
was told to sit in a comfortable chair at the opposite side of the room away 
from his desk. Apparently this man’s hobby was collecting and reading 
western magazines so he was told to put a pile of these magazines on a table 
next to him with a pencil and pad. 

During the afternoon he was to relax and read through these 
magazines but write down any interesting ideas that popped into his mind 
about the business in the meantime. 

This businessman was very startled to find that he was doing far more 
good for his business in the afternoon than he was in the morning. By not 
trying to think of things consciously he allowed the vast creative resources of 
his subconscious mind to filter through with the novel ideas he needed. Even 

20 


reading his favourite magazines allowed his conscious mind to become 
distracted long enough for his subconscious mind to come through. What we 
are really talking about here is a daydreaming state. 

The Induction:


Induction simply means the change from the waking alert state into the 
daydreaming one. As I have said there are a large number of ways it is 
possible to do this and we will go into them in detail at a later date. By the way 
am not referring to the mystical or weird and wonderful ways like crystal balls, 
swinging watches, strobe lights etc. 

As you know by now the object of the exercise is to allow your 
conscious mind to concentrate on something so as to allow your 
subconscious mind to filter through eventually so that you can tell it what you 
want it to do for you. For the time being we are simply interested in getting 
you used to going into trance state easily and back to normal consciousness. 

There are three basic elements to Hypnosis:


1.) Going into trance - Induction. 

2.) Using the trance/altered state to achieve a certain aim. 

3.) Returning to normal consciousness. 

To do this you need to have the intention and desire to achieve the 
altered state in your own way and in your own time. You will need to allocate 
time and find suitable surroundings where you will not be disturbed. 
Remember don’t try, don’t force it, let it just happen. And also remember you 
will be in total control and that what you are doing is perfectly safe. 

The first time you go into Self-Hypnosis allocate twenty to thirty 
minutes and remember relaxation is your aim in these sessions. If you wear 
contact lenses it is best to remove them and make sure you don’t need the 
toilet. Also it is best to avoid eating a heavy meal just before going into trance 
since you might feel uncomfortable. If you are feeling very hungry just eat 
something light first. The following script could be recorded on to a cassette 
tape or you could memorise it. If you do record it you should read it slowly and 
take pauses between sentences and phrases. If you memorise it speak to 
yourself in the first person i.e. I feel relaxed or I feel sleepy etc. 

Now let us start:


21 


1.)Sit in a comfortable chair or lie down. 

2.)Look up at the ceiling or towards your eyebrows. 

3.) Take a deep breath and hold it for a few seconds. (The earlier exercises 
will have helped you with this.) Then exhale slowly. 

4.) The third time you breath in hold it for a few seconds and then exhale 
slowly allow your eyelids to close. 

5.) Think about how you are breathing and on every out breath imagine you 
are letting go of the tension in you body. 

6.) Let you breathing become slow and calm and regular. Start to relax the 
toes on you feet starting with the right foot. When your feet feel relaxed simply 
let the muscles in your ankles go limp and relaxed. 

Now let the feeling of relaxation drift up into your calf muscles and then 
on into your thigh muscles. 

Gradually let your muscles relax around your waist and on up into your 
stomach. With each breath you take and each time you exhale feel yourself 
letting go. 

Let the feeling of relaxation move on up your spine into your shoulders 
and neck muscles. Just let go now feel your arms begin to relax and feel 
heavy and lazy. 

The following affirmation should be included in all your Hypnotic 
affirmations: 


Now you do know and do trust that you will immediately awaken totally 
alert and in normal consciousness should there be an emergency that needs 
your attention. 

You always readily accept the suggestions given while in Hypnosis 
and reach a perfect balance between the conscious and subconscious mind. 
Each time you go into trance you find it easier and easier 

7.) When you are feeling totally relaxed just let your mind drift. Let any 
thoughts that come into your mind just wander in and out. Don’t try to stop 
them or hold onto them just float there like an observer watching life go by 
from a cafe or on a beach. 

22 


8.) In your own time when you feel totally relaxed just notice how nice it is just 
to do nothing. In your imagination talk to the various parts of your body about 
how nice it is to feel so relaxed. 

9.) let that nice feeling of totally calm relaxation be stored in your memory so 
that you can recreate the sensations at a later date. 

10.) Remain in this calm state for fifteen minutes or so. Don’t expect too much 
at this stage just let it all happen. A great many things will be happening of 
which you are not consciously aware. 

11.) When you are ready to come out of trance just count backwards slowly 
from ten back to one. While you do this imagine yourself feeling wide awake 
and refreshed. Then gently open your eyes. 

The technique you have just used is called “Fractional Relaxation”. It may 
seem a bit long winded at first but it is an excellent method for beginners to 
use. In a short time you will be able to learn the quicker techniques. 

Try not to consciously analyse every aspect of your trance as this will alert 
your critical factor and take you out of the trance state. 

The experience is different for everybody so I won’t try to describe it for you 
except to say it will probably feel familiar. You will almost certainly been there 
before in that twilight zone just before you go off to sleep or just before you 
awake. 

In time you will get very used to this feeling of “parallel awareness” You 
will come to recognise being there but part of you being somewhere else. This 
is not to be confused with being in a dream while asleep as you will see later 
in the course. 

In part two I will show you how to, and how not to, 
talk to the subconscious in a way that really gets 
startling results. In part two I will give you a cassette 
tape to help you go into Self-Hypnosis. 

In part two you will learn how to programme your 
mind to help you become more positive and creative 
in whatever field you desire! 

23 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind! 



Part Two 


Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


24 



“The true value of Hypnosis is that makes your mind optimally receptive to 

your own thoughts” 

Dr H. Spiegel, American Psychiatrist 


Welcome back! By now you are probably getting used to and enjoying 
going into trance state hopefully twice a day. Don’t worry if you can’t find the 
time for two sessions each and every day at first but do try and find time for 
one session a day. Self-Hypnosis is much like anything else in life the more 
you put in the more you get out. Notice I did not say the more effort you put in 
the more you get out since that would give you the wrong kind of message. 

You will come to realise that “will-power does not really exist when you 
are dealing with the mind. Since your subconscious mind will make you do 
what it feels you want or need conscious will power does not really come into 

It. 

If you have ever suffered from insomnia you will recognise the problem 
that the more you try to get to sleep the harder it becomes! Lets imagine you 
have that important meeting in the morning and you tell yourself that you must 
get those vital eight hours otherwise you think you will feel terrible and blow 
some big deal. This kind of state of mind will almost certainly ensure you will 
fail in your goal of getting a good night sleep. The Tony Hancock episode 
called the “sleepless night” illustrates this condition perfectly. 

In fact while I think of it you could give yourself the suggestion while in 
trance to the effect that because you enjoy your trance state so much you 
always ensure you find the time to go into Self Hypnosis because you know it 
is so good for you and you love the wonderfully relaxed feeling it brings. 

To programme your subconscious mind the very last thing you should 
do is use brute force! Let your subconscious mind do what it was intended to 
do. It will not disappoint you! Remember:


The more relaxed we are the better we perform! 

How To Phrase Your Suggestions So That The 
Subconscious Will EASILY Act On Them: 

25 



What we have to remember when dealing with the subconscious mind 
is that it must react to the suggestions it receives as though they are orders! 
While the conscious mind is inhibited or subdued by entering trance state it is 
possible to reach the subconscious mind un-hindered by the conscious mind’s 
critical factor. 

In order to get the best results from the subconscious mind we have to 
follow certain rules when wording our suggestions. If you can create well 
phrases suggestions you will be able to put this great force for good to work 
for you without you having to use will power or conscious effort. 

MOTIVATION 


I would hope that whatever it is you want to achieve with the help of 
hypnosis it is something you really want and not just some kind of passing 
whim. The more you want to succeed then obviously the greater the success 
you will have. It is no use hypnotising yourself to become a brilliant snooker 
player if you don’t really intend to go down to the pool hail several days a 
week. Why waste this great force within you and your precious time on 
something you don’t really want. If you order your subconscious mind to help 
you to earn more money and really mean it then it will move heaven and earth, 
work day and night until you have achieved your goal. Remember the 
subconscious mind never sleeps. I have some suggestions to help you decide 
what it is you really want to achieve but for the time being just read the 
following rules on how to talk to your subconscious mind: 

RULE ONE:


In this months release you are going to learn how to condition your 

mind to become more positive and receptive to new ideas and thought 
patterns. It is a strange coincidence that in order to talk to the subconscious 
mind effectively we have to adopt a positive tone of voice and use positive 
terminology. This is because the subconscious mind houses our emotional 
thoughts and so responds well to emotion. 

For example if you were phrasing a sentence to help yourself with 
insomnia you might say “I always enjoy a good nights sleep” or “I sleep 
soundly and deeply all night long”. 

It would be wrong to say something like “I don’t have any trouble 
getting off to sleep at night. I do not toss and turn all night long”. This is 
because if you include any negative words and phrases in your message it 
reminds the subconscious of the problem that you have going off to sleep at 
night. 

26 



If you are trying to rid yourself of a headache you would not say “When 
I return to full consciousness my headache will be gone” because you are 
reminding yourself that you have a headache. Far better to say something like 
“My head Feels wonderfully good and relaxed”. 

There is a mental law which states that “What is expected will be 
realised”. This is the Law of Mental expectancy. Even in the Bible there is the 
saying “For the thing which I so greatly feared is come upon me” 

So always phrase your message from the point of view of what it is you 
are trying to achieve and not what it is you are trying to avoid. So the first rule 
when getting messages across to your subconscious is to BE POSITIVE! 

RULE TWO:


The subconscious mind likes to hear instructions in the present tense best. 

So we put our phrases in the present form like “ I am feeling very sleepy”. 

You would not say “I will feel sleepy’ because your subconscious 
mind wants to hear the idea it is receiving as though it is already 
accomplished. The exception to this rule is if you are recovering from an 
illness and you want to speed up your rate of progress. For example if you 
have broken your arm and it is in plaster you cannot tell your subconscious 
mind that the arm is completely healed, it will not believe you. Your critical 
factor would be activated and prevent the message from being accepted by 
your subconscious mind. 

After all it knows your have your arm in plaster and so won’t be fooled. 
Instead you have to use a progressive form of the present tense e.g. “Each 
day my arm is becoming stronger and stronger”. You would do far better 
to ask your doctor how long you would expect your arm to heel under normal 
circumstances and halve this time in your suggestions. You will be amazed at 
the results! 

If you are constructing suggestions for some future event you still have 
to use the present tense. lf you wanted to be relaxed giving a speech at a 
meeting next Tuesday you would phrase you suggestion as follows “Next 
Tuesday when I give my speech to the meeting I am calm, relaxed, and 
Feel in total control”. 

27 



You want to avoid conflicting images been given to the subconscious. 
For example you would not say” Next Tuesday when I give my speech to the 
meeting I am far more confident than I was last time”. This is because your 
subconscious mind will dig up negative and unpleasant memories of how you 
used to be. You obviously want your mind to hold the image of how you want 
to be or behave. 

The present tense is important because it exists now it is immediate 
and is harder for the subconscious to ignore. “I will eventually be able-or 
“one day it might be possible For me to “ These kind of suggestions are 
far too wishy washy and indeterminate for the subconscious to hold a firm 
picture of what it is you are trying to achieve. 

RULE THREE:


Be as SPECIFIC as you possibly can. This follows on from rule two. 

The clearer an image or instruction can be the easier it will be for your 
subconscious mind to accept it and hold. With a clear goal in mind it will be 
able to run with it and steer you in the direction you need to go! 

It is best, particularly at first, to concentrate on one goal at a time. 
Certainly in one Hypnosis session you want to stick to one specific area of 
improvement. You do not want to suggest that you have lost two stone, 
become a better public speaker, stopped smoking, etc. all in one single half-
hour session. You want to stick with your chosen aim and stay with it until you 
feel there is some improvement. How long this will take will depend on many 
things. 

How realistic your chosen goal is will determine how quickly you 
achieve your chosen goal. If you weigh six stone and are only four feet tall you 
might find your subconscious mind has a little trouble believing that you are 
going to be the world heavy weight champion in two weeks 

How well your suggestion is worded obviously has a big effect on how 
successful you are. However if you follow the advice given here you should 
not have any problems. If you find your rate of progress a little slow at first try 
to re-work the suggestion a little. A little change here or there can work 
wonders. 

Once you feel you are making some progress you can alternate your 
Hypnosis sessions by introducing another goal. Remember to stick to one 
goal per session though. If you are trying to get to sleep more easily it would 
