190 


branches called “dendrites”. The dendrites act as a sort of bridge. Each nerve 
cell can have thousands of connections. Some scientists believe that this 
intricate network transmits electrical messages between cells which in turn 
causes chemical reactions to occur which are then encoded as memory. The 
greater the number of connections between the cells the greater the memory. 

There are some interesting discoveries to show that there are 
significant differences between the kind of memories that are stored in the 
different hemispheres of the brain. This information has helped to develop 
some of the memory recall techniques I am going to teach you later. 

The important substance that connects the dendrites is a fatty protein 
called “Myelin”. Myelin is produced by the brain and covers the connection 
between the dendrites as you learn new information. If this connection is 
stimulated in the future then more coats are added to aid this connection. As 
the coat gets thicker, as the specific information is relearned, less effort or 
energy is needed to make the connection and the connection is said to be 
“myelinated”. 

This process has caused some psychologists to believe that 
information should be taught in concentrated batches. This why the average 
school lesson lasting approximately thirty or forty minutes is largely 
ineffectual. Some tests have shown that the normal child will only remember 
about three or four percent of the information when it is taught like this. 
Some believe that children, or even adult students for that matter, should be 
totally immersed in the subject so as to allow the brain to make the proper 
connections. (One assumes that the children want to learn the stuff in the first 
place though!) 

This is how many business seminars are taught these days. A topic is 
gone into in great depth all day. Total immersion is a good thing, however it is 
important to take regular scheduled breaks for reasons I will explain shortly. 

The simple fact is that we still do not actually know for sure how 
memories are stored in the brain but there is currently a great deal of 
research being carried out in this area. 

191 


Does Your Memory Change as You Age? 

Most experts will tell you that rather than our memories deteriorating as 
we get older it is more a question of them getting rusty through lack of use. 
Tests have shown that older people tested for memory against younger 
people, who had left college for some time, revealed that there is no 
significant difference between the two. The fact is that there is evidence to 
suggest that provided a person is in good health there is no reason why their 
memory should diminish significantly. 

However there is evidence to suggest that if it is not used it can get 
rusty. There is further evidence to show that by practising memory 
techniques you can boost your memory power by a huge margin. 

Does My Diet Effect My Memory? 

If you eat a balanced diet and avoid eating processed food there 
should not be any reason why your diet should effect your memory. However 
there are a number of nutrients which are essential if you brain, and memory 
are to function efficiently. Recent research has found that choline is essential 
for good memory. In fact it has been used to treat people with all kinds of 
mental disorders. Choline occurs naturally in Soya beans. Folic acid is also 
an important nutrient for efficient brain functioning and if you have a 
deficiency then this can cause you to have problems with concentration and 
memory. Folic acid occurs naturally in green leafy vegetables like spinach, 
broccoli, or parsley. 

Vitamin B1, B2 & B5 and magnesium are all very important to the 
general health of out nervous system. B3 has been found to be important to 
maintain the metabolism of the brain and this in turn helps you concentrate. 
Also B6, B12, Iron, copper, Zinc, and calcium are all important ingredients. I 
am not recommending you go out and start popping pills all day and would 
reiterate that a healthy balanced diet containing fresh produce, preferably 
organic, is all you probably need to maintain a healthy body and mind. 
However if you think you may be deficient perhaps you should consult your 
doctor. 

Antibiotics or consumption of alcohol will reduce the level of vital 
nutrients within the body and so there may be a good case for taking 
supplements when you are ill or are feeling under the weather. There are 
problems with most supplements because the body finds it very hard to 
absorb the vitamins and minerals in pill form so you are really better off 
ensuring you eat well. 

192 


Vitamin C is good for reducing stress within the body and helps 
remove toxins. We are the only mammal which does not produce vitamin C 
naturally within the body and so need to obtain it exclusively from our diet. 
Although many foods do contain Vitamin C many nutritionists recommend that 
we take vitamin supplements every day, roughly about 500 milligrams per 
day. If you opt to take Vitamin C supplements you should spread the dosage 
out throughout the day otherwise the body just flushes out the excess if it is 
taken all in one go. 

Now I want you to guess what factor the experts 
consider to be particularly bad for the brain and 
memory in particular? 

That's right its Stress! 


I'm not going to repeat myself by going into how bad stress is for the 
system. You should by now appreciate how important it is to eliminate stress 
as far as possible from your body. I hope you are using the techniques 
shown in the course and the audio tapes provided to do this. 

You don't need me to remind you how stressful it can be to take an 
exam and have your mind to go blank when you turned the examination 
paper over. None of the answers come to you when you need them most 
however once the exam is over and you are outside feeling more relaxed the 
answers that were so elusive before suddenly come flooding in your mind. 

Breathing properly is one of the best ways to keep stress under 
control and as we know the brain requires a lot of oxygen to function properly. 

As we have seen in earlier releases the advanced techniques of 
meditation, yoga, and martial arts all require that we breathe properly. 
Although the brain only accounts for about two to three per cent of our body's 
weight, it is thought to need at least 25 per cent of our oxygen intake. As you 
know from a previous release oxygenating the blood is a key factor in the 
physical and mental disciplines from the east and regular exercise is one 
way to achieve this. 

193 


The Psychology Of Memory: 


Broadly speaking memory falls into two categories. One is called 
short term memory and the other as long term memory. As the name 
suggests, short term memory is temporary where as long-term memory is 
permanent. The short term memory is used to remember immediate 
information in order to carry out an immediate task. A good example would 
be if you had to remember someone's telephone number long enough so that 
you could write it down or dial it. Short-term memory can last anything from 
20 seconds up to two days. 

Now unless there is some reason why the information learned should 
be made permanent you will forget it, at least consciously. If there is some 
important reason why you need to remember the information, then you'll 
have to make a conscious effort to transfer it into your long-term memory. 

Long-term memory has been described as permanent storage and in 
theory you should be able to retrieve information from it once it has been 
stored there. 

Example of how the short term memory and long-term memory work 
together is when you read something. Your short term memory has to retain 
the words within a sentence long enough for the image or concept of what 
you reading to be transferred into your long-term memory. Once you've 
grasped the concept the individual words that you have read will be quickly 
forgotten, at least by your conscious mind. 

Research carried out during the late part of the 19th century showed 
that when we memorise items on a list we tend to remember the items at the 
very beginning and at the very end better than those in between. It also 
seems that the majority of the items we forget are forgotten almost 
immediately after reading them. Approximately 70 per cent of the information 
learned would be forgotten within 24 hours. However if the list of items was 
reviewed within that period then there was a much greater chance of 
transferring information to the long-term memory. 

The best way of remembering items in this way is to review them for 
five minutes duration ten minutes after your first attempt at learning them. 
Then review the list once more the following day again for about five minutes. 
The next stage would be to review the list once more about a week's time for 
approximately three minutes. Your next review should be made a month later 
again for only three minutes. Your last review should take place six months 
for about three to five minutes. By this time you should find that the 
information you are learning will have been transferred effectively to your 
long-term memory. 

194 


So if you have a list of information that you want to commit to your long-term 
memory the following technique is quite effective. 

Memory Technique One: 


1. Read through material for the first time. 
2. Review 
the material for five minutes, 10 minutes 
later. 
3. Review the material the week later for 
approximately three minutes. 
4. Review the material one month later 
again for 
three minutes. 
5. Finally review material six months later for about 
three minutes. 
Now although most information is forgotten immediately after reading, 
there is some evidence to suggest that memory actually improves for about 
two to five minutes after learning something. This has been called the 
reminiscence effect. We are not clear why this should happen but some 
have theorised that it is at this stage that our conscious mind makes links 
with the subconscious mind in some way. 

This is why it is a good idea to take breaks of about five minutes between 
learning any new material. If you have a lot of information that you wish to 
learn it is a good idea to split it up into equal chunks. Each chunk or portion 
of material should not take more than 30 to 40 minutes to learn. Before 
moving on to the next portion of information you should take a five-minute 
break. 

By doing this, you help your memory to process the information because 
each chunk of material will have a beginning and an end. And as you 
remember we remember items better that occur at the beginning and end of 
a section. So by splitting your work into many sections you create many 
more beginnings and endings. By taking regular five-minute breaks in 

195 


between you are also making use of the reminiscence effect. Before 
embarking on learning any new material you should first revise what you have 
just learnt. For some reason by doing this it helps the memory improve and 
makes it easier to remember future material. 

Next month I will go into memory in much greater detail and show 
you some amazing techniques that you can put to use to vastly improve 
your ability to remember. The thing to remember about memory is that we 
don't really forget anything. And as I have already told you during this course, 
our subconscious minds remember almost everything we see, hear, and do. 

The real problem is not memory but how to 
recall all the information that our subconscious mind 
has stored away. 

Some people believe it would be terrific if we consciously remembered 
everything we were exposed to. However the fact that our brains allow us to 
forget day-to-day trivia is very important. For example do you really wish to 
know what you have for breakfast on the 23rd March 1986? Do you really 
wish to remember what was said in a school assembly on a particular day 
when you were seven years old. 

It may be that you can remember a particular school assembly when you 
were young but if you do remember it, it is because it stuck in your mind for 
some reason. This is the secret to developing a good memory and I shall 
explain this next month. In the meantime here are three lists of items I want 
you to memorise for next month. Just do the best you can. Please don't worry 
if you can't remember them all. I can assure you, you'll soon be able to 
remember a list five, ten, or more times as long, without any problems. 

Tomatoes, carrots, cauliflower, potatoes, peas, broccoli, asparagus, 
beans, lettuce. 

Apples, bananas, oranges, pineapple, grapes, apricots, peaches, pears, 
tangerines. 

Telephone, lorry, office, pushchair, settee, guitar, bicycle, space shuttle, 
oil tanker, Post Office, Bank, clock, pencil, deep-freeze, train. 

196 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind!! 



Part Ten 


Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999- 2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


197 


PART TEN 


(How to develop a fantastic memory!) 

With a little practise after using the techniques in this month’s release 
you will amazed at how much easier it will be to remember facts, details, and 
tasks you have to do. You will be able to remember lists of names. telephone 
numbers, etc. You will be able to give speeches, lectures and presentations 
with much more confidence. 

I expect your life, in common with most people, is full of things we have 
to do, appointments, phone numbers, peoples names, information learned on 
courses for your work or at college. The list is endless. 

Now and again on television we see amazing people dazzle us with 
feats of memory. Some magicians perfect the technique of remembering 
people’s names and faces even their jobs etc. Sometimes they will be able to 
recall the names of over two hundred people after only meeting them once! 

Doormen of prestigious restaurants make sure they have mastered this 
technique. At the Canlis restaurant in Seattle the doorman amazed diners 
with the power of his memory. When they arrived he would park their cars but 
would never issue them with a ticket or write anything down. When the diners 
had finished their meal he would observe them through a small window and 
made sure their car was waiting for them when they left the restaurant. 

This man had to deal with hundreds of clients during the week. How 
could he do this? 

If I were to tell you that your memory is probably every bit as 
phenomenal as the magician’s or the doorman’s you might find that hard to 
believe but it is true. In fact you could probably do a lot better with the right 
techniques and a lot of practise! 

Now there is an important point I want to make before we go on. Many 
people will complain that they have a poor memory when what they actually 
mean is that they have poor RECALL. 

I have said it before but I will say I again. Your brain is able to 
remember everything you have heard seen or done. In side your mind right 
now are probably all the names of your classmates from your reception class 
at infant school. You almost certainly know the address and telephone 
number of every place you have ever lived. You probably even know what 
you had for lunch on the 14th March 1985. 

198 


The fact that our brains retain all this information is well documented 
and many studies have been carried out. The problem for us is being able to 
recall this information which is filled away deep inside our subconscious mind. 
Now most of this information is of little value and we are not likely to want to 
remember it. But other information would be very useful to recall when we 
wanted or needed it. 

The trouble is our brains are designed to confine most information into 
storage unless it thinks there is a good reason to keep it on hand. If we want 
to recall information we have to use certain techniques to help us get hold of it 
at a later date. 

Your memory will only recall what it considers to be important or 
meaningful to your life. Your memory will recall items, and situations if they 
have made a strong impact or have Strong Associations. As we shall see 
the ability to form associations is the key to most memory techniques. 

However your memory remembers things best if they have or use the 
following characteristics. 

1. 
Memories that stimulate the sensory centres of the brain, particularly 
visual associations, are easier to recall. 
2. 
Event which have strong emotional content like love, sorrow, or 
happiness will be easier to remember. 
3. 
Events which involve unusual or outstanding qualities have a habit of 
sticking in the mind. (Like a flying saucer landing on top of your 
house). You are not likely to forget something like this. 
4. 
Your mind will make sure you remember anything which has a 
connection with your survival 
5. 
Repetition is one way of helping your memory to recall certain facts 
or events. 
Sensory/Visual Associations:


Any experiences which involve sight, sound, taste, touch, or movement will 
have particularly strong associations for our memory. The connections 

199 


become more vivid for the memory if more than one sense is used. This is 
why it can help to read out aloud if you are trying to remember something. If 
you act out what you are learning as well, this involves both your visual, 
kinaesthetic and auditory senses at the same time. 

Emotional Associations:


Memories which are charged with great joy and happiness are unlikely 
to fade away. Lets face it you not going to forget the first person you fell in 
love with, or the day your son/daughter was born. You are also likely to 
remember days which are charged with great sorrow like the a bereavement 
of a loved one for example. The exception to this is where the grief, or 
experience, is so painful the mind shuts it out to avoid you feeling the pain. 

Associations which are Unusual or Outstanding:


This is one of the keys to many memory techniques. We tend to 
remember things better if they are unusual in some way. For example you 
would notice and remember if you someone parachuted into you garden or if 
a flying saucer landed on your front lawn and a little green man asked you 
directions to Andromida. If you were to try and remember the people who 
were doing their shopping in the local supermarket last Friday you would 
probably have problems remembering anyone you saw because they didn’t 
stand out any way, they were not unusual. 

Intensity:


Any situations that involve absurd, colourful, sexual, exaggerated, 
imaginative even painful associations will be easier to remember. They “stick 
in the mind” somehow. 

Necessary for Survival:


You can be sure that you will remember what plants or snakes are 
poisonous if your life depended on it, or what plants are good to eat and 
which made you sick. You will remember that it is not a good ideas to stick 
your tongue in the plug socket. 

Repeated Items:


This is perhaps the most commonly used method of remembering 
something although not always the most efficient. Telephone numbers that 
you constantly use will be stored away in your long term memory and will not 

200 


have to be looked up. This is because the connections in the brain will have 
been sufficiently mylenated. Any physical activity relies on repetition in order 
to perfect the techniques involved. This is true whether you are learning a 
new dance routine or mastering a new movement or form in a martial art. 
Musicians rely on a great deal of repetition to learn a new piece of music 
particularly if they want to commit it to memory. 

In fact music is an interesting example because the process of 
learning a piece of music involves many senses at one and the same time. 
There are the visual cues from the printed score, physical cues from the act of 
playing the notes, to the auditory stimuli of the actual sounds produced. There 
can also be emotional associations that the music stirs within the performer. 

Acronyms:


Acronyms are used to summarise a group of items or words by using 
the initial letters of the words to form new word. For example MAD was used 
to describe the policy which kept the peace between the Soviet Union and the 
West during the nuclear age (Mutually Assured Destruction). There are many 
other very familiar examples NATO, OPEC, etc. These are useful ways of 
trying to remember some simple concepts. 

Another simple technique commonly used in schools is a variation of 
the acronym system. We are often taught a rhyme in order to memorise a list 
of items. Most of us who were taught music will remember “Every Good Boy 
Deserves Football” which was used to teach us what the names of the notes 
on a stave of music are. However these two examples are very basic 
techniques of memory recall. I want to show some other less well known 
methods which are very effective in memorising lists of items and various 
unrelated facts. As you are now probably aware there is one basic key 
ingredient which always present in all memory techniques and that is:


201 


ASSOCIATION! 


The key factor in being able to remember things is our ability to form 
associations. Some associations go hand in glove with one another and 
appear quite natural like swimming and water or sea and beach. Other 
associations are not so obvious so we have to have a conscious effort to form 
associations. 

The more outrageous you can make the connections between the 
things you are trying to remember the easier it will be to remember them. 
What you have to do is to visualise your associations as vividly as you can. 
Make them silly, ridiculous, humorous, sexy, even frightening. The very act of 
taking the trouble to form these images in your mind makes the whole 
process of remembering them much easier. 

The Link Method:


In part nine I gave you a list of sixteen items for you to try and remember. 

Telephone, lorry, office, pushchair, settee, guitar, bicycle, space shuttle, 
oil tanker, Post Office, Bank, clock, pencil, deep-freeze, train. 

I want you read through them again for about five minutes and then 
close this release. Now try to write them down in the order they are given 
here. 

How did you do? 

These items are all unrelated to each other and so connecting them 
together in some logical way would seem difficult at first sight. What I am 
going to show you is how you can make links between these objects in a way 
that one leads you on to the next one and so on. It is rather like connecting 
the links in a chain. 

By using the link method it is easy to remember all these items without 
having to write them down or carrying out repetition. What is more you will be 
able to remember them in order and even reverse order. And more over you 
will be able to retain this information for as long as you want or need to. You 
can use this method to remember lists of all manner of things. You can use it 
to remember appointments or main themes in a speech. It is particularly 
useful if you have to recall any information that has to be recalled in 

202 


sequence. 

It can be hard to simply remember plain words or facts so we must find 
a way of making these items memorable in some way. In order to be able to 
do this we must learn how to form strong mental images. There are a few 
rules we must follow if our mental images more easily we must follow a few 
simple rules:


1. Exaggerate our pictures perhaps by making objects much bigger than 
they really are or by using Vivid Colours. You can exaggerate the 
quantity of an item or items. Use three dimensions. You can also 
personify the objects by turning them into cartoon characters. In this 
way you objects can do seemingly impossible or outrageous things. 
2. 
Whenever you can, provided it is appropriate, you should add 
movement, action, humour, and, provided it does not offend you 
sensibilities, add violence or sexual connotations. 
3. 
Try to draw on your own personal experiences when forming you 
mental pictures. Use people and things you know. 
4. 
Try to use and involve as many of you senses as you can. Add 
sound, see the images clearly, but also add smell, taste, and touch. 
5. 
Finally while forming your mental pictures you can form memorable 
associations or links by (a) Placing objects on top of one another, (b) 
Placing objects underneath one another, (c) Putting objects inside 
one another, (d) Or by smashing the objects into each other, and (e) 
You can reverse the items. 
Now the first two items on the list I gave you were Telephone and 
Lorry. Can you form a suitable mental picture to link these two items. 
Perhaps you can imagine a giant telephone on wheels crashing into a lorry? 
Or a brightly coloured telephone in the shape of a lorry? Or you could have a 
lorry take on human characteristics and have it talking down the giant 
telephone to the office. 

The important thing is to make strong mental pictures which mean 
something to you. These examples are just a few of many thousands of 
examples you could use. What I have done is make the items interact with 
one another, in this way the memory of one leads you onto the thought of the 
next item and it is in this way you can build your chain. In my last example I 
had the lorry talk down the phone to the office. Imagine the office filled with a 
giant pushchair. Your could have the pushchair relaxing on a settee. The 

203 


settee could be playing the guitar or shaped like a guitar. 

You could have a guitar riding a bicycle. The bicycle could ride up to 
the launch pad of the space shuttle which could take off but unfortunately 
crash into an oil tanker. The huge explosion could set light to a post office 
many metres away or the oil tanker could be blown right up into the air only to 
land on top of a post office. The fire from the post office might spread to the 
Bank next door. Firemen looking like clocks arrive to put the fire out and one 
uses a brightly coloured pencil instead of a hose! Do you get the idea? 

Finally the water to douse to fire is so cold it freezes everything 
because it is coming out of a huge deep-freeze and the deep freeze is large 
and heavy it has to be supported on a train. 

Now I want you to spend a few moments to form vivid mental pictures 
of the sequence of events I have just described. I am sure you can think of 
some better ideas. Now wait a few moments and write out the list again. 

I would be surprised if you did not do much better this time. What is 
more if you test yourself again in two days time the chances are you will still 
be able to recall these items in perfect order. Don’t worry if you have a little 
trouble with some of the items the thing is it takes practise to form strong 
mental images but in time it will become second nature! 

204 


The Room Method:


This technique is a variation on a method to remember a sequence of 
facts or items that was widely used by the Ancient Romans. A senator giving 
an important speech to the senate would imagine a long walk and on this 
imaginary walk there would be key places or objects along the way. What he 
would do is associate these key points on the walk with the important themes 
on his speech in his mind. 

As he imagined himself making progress on his walk he would come 
across these key stages or landmarks and this would jog his memory about 
what the next point he wanted to make in his speech. The landmarks could be 
anything from a fountain, a shop, or a particular villa etc. The point is it was 
the association with the landmark that was important and the fact that they 
were kept in sequence. 

The room method is very similar except you use the various rooms in 
your house or flat. What you do is think of two or three distinctive objects in 
each room that you can use to form associations with whatever it is you have 
to remember. 

The advantage of this system is that you know the layout of your house very 
well and this makes forming connections fairly straight forward. Suppose you 
wanted to remember the items below, all you would have to do is link each 
one with one or more of the objects in the rooms of your house. 

For example in the hall you might use objects like, a table, a clothes peg, and 
the front door. Try to think of three objects you could use in each of the rooms 
of our house. Start with the Hall and move around the house using each room 
in the order you reach them so as to keep them in sequence. For example the 
hall might lead into the lounge, then the dinning room, then bedroom one, 
Bedroom two etc. 

Try to remember the following list of items using the room method. 
Remember to use the techniques we used before when forming your mental 
pictures. 

1. Exaggerate. 
2. Use Motion, humour etc. 
3. Use personal experiences etc 
4. Use as many of your senses as possible. 
5. Put objects next to or inside one another etc. 
Tomatoes, carrots, cauliflower, potatoes, peas, broccoli, asparagus, beans, lettuce. 

205 


Apples, bananas, oranges, pineapple, grapes, apricots, peaches, pears, tangerines. 

Numeric Memory Systems:


As the title suggests numeric memory systems are designed to 
connect numbers to the items or facts you are trying to remember. One of the 
most simple techniques you can use is the “rhyming system”. 

Rhyming System:


What you do here is create key words, normally of tangible objects, to 
represent numbers. In this way you can recall items or appointments in the 
correct sequence. For example:


1. Could be BUN. 
2. Could be. 
3. Is TREE. 
4. Is Door. 
5. Is Hive. 
6. Is STICKS. 
7. Is DEVON or HEAVEN. 
8. Is SKATE. 
9. Is WINE. 
10. Is DEN. 
You could try to make associations between the first list of items I gave 
you and the key words I have given here. The benefit of this system is that 
you will be able to think of an item out of sequence and give the number 
associated with it. For example the ninth item on the list below is Oil Tanker. If 
you associated this with the key word WINE you would know that Oil Tanker 
was the ninth item on the list, and so on. Have a go at forming connections 
with the following items this time use the key words given above. 

Telephone, lorry, office, pushchair, settee, guitar, bicycle, space 
shuttle, oil tanker, Post Office. 

Another system which is similar to the rhyme system is the “SHAPE 
SYSTEM”. What you do here is think of objects or key words who’s shape 
remind you of the image of a number. For example the number one (1) might 
make you think of a pencil or pen, (2) could represent a swan, and so on. If 
you are a visual person then this approach might work better for you than say 
the rhyming system. This methods can work well if you want to remember 
short lists or appointments or perhaps main ideas for a presentation. 

206 


The Phonetic Memory System:


I now want to show you what known as the most powerful numeric 
system yet devised. It is a little more complicated than the other two systems 
just mentioned but once you have mastered the basics it will give you the 
ability to recall vast amounts of data. You will be able to remember peoples 
telephone numbers, account numbers, formulae, technical equations, in fact it 
has can have a vast number of applications. If you have not come across this 
system before then prepare to be amazed! All the numeric systems are 
designed to relate abstract numbers to concrete or tangible items or facts. 

As the name suggests we are going to use the sounds of consonants 
to represent the numbers from 0 to 9. Vowels don’t count in this system 
neither will silent consonants. Here is list of the sounds that we will be using:


1. = (t). 
2. = (n). 
3. = (m). 
4. = (r). 
5. = (l). 
6. = (j). 
7. = (k). 
8. = (f). 
9. = (p). 
0. = (z). 
Now these sounds are not as random s you might think. The letter (t) 
looks a bit like the number one and the letter (n) has two legs going down and 
the letter (m) representing the number three has three legs. The fourth letter 
in the word four is an (r). Not all the key letters have such a logical 
connection and it might seem a bit complicated at first but once you have 
mastered the basics it really is very easy. 

The next step is to put some key, sometimes called peg, words to each of 
these sounds. Remember vowels and silent consonants don’t count. 

207 


1. (t) tea. 
2. (n) Noah (as Noah’ ark). 
3. (m) mow. (as in mowing the lawn). 
4. (r) ray. 
5. (l) law. 
6. (j) Jaw. 
7. (k) key. 
8. (f) fee. 
9. (p) pie. 
10.(s) sea. 
Now these are examples you could create your own peg words in fact 
it is a good idea to do so however you may wish to stick with these until you 
know what you are doing. In order to make it easier to find words to represent 
numbers we can use other sounds to represent the same number. See the 
chart below:


Once you have mastered your basic key words of phonetic sounds you 
can expand your list of words. If you think about it all the numbers we use 
have the digits 0-9 in them. For example if you wanted a peg word to 
represent the number 11 you would choose a word with two (t) sounds in it 
like (tattoo). The first two (t(s) in tattoo represent the two 11 in eleven the 
third (t) does not count because it is silent and of course the vowels don’t 
count either. 

For the number 12 you might choose the peg word (tin). Again one is 
represented by the (t) and the two by the sound (n). Here is a list of the next 
few peg words up to twenty so that you get the general idea:


209 


10. = toes. 
11. = tattoo. 
12. = tin. 
13. = team 
14. = tar. 
15. = tail. 
16. = tissue (this uses a soft ss sound so can 
represent the number 6). If you prefer you could have 
teach. 
17. = tack. 
18. = toffee. 
19. = tap. 
20. = nose. 
Once you have become proficient in creating you peg words to 
represent the numbers you need you can go on an on indefinitely. I think you 
will probably see how it is possible to memorise a list of at least a hundred 
items in any order you like. Provided you can make strong associations in 
your mind’s eye with the thing you are trying to remember you should not 
have any real trouble. It does take practise to convert words into numbers. 
See if you can work out what numbers the following words make:


Cauliflower, Market, Paint, Rarity, Gentleman, Medicine. 

( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 

209 


Answers:


Cauliflower = 7584, Market 3471, Paint 921, Rarity = 441, 
Gentleman = 621532, Medicine = 3102. 

How to use the Phonetic system to 
memorise telephone numbers:


You may have noticed that some of the words have many numbers 
representing them like gentleman. Now this can present problems trying to 
find words which go with certain numbers. The more numbers you use the 
harder it is to find an appropriate word. For example try and find a word to 
represent 742821937. It is for this reason we tend to only use the first three 
syllables of a word when ascribing numbers to them. So gentleman would in 
fact represent 621 and not 621532. This makes it easier to find words which 
have meaning and with which we can make visual associations. 

So lets see if we can create some peg words to represent the following 
telephone numbers:


850 847 323 4423 555 8486 345 713 

The first number 850 for me signifies the word (flies) and 847 
represents (fork). Once I have these two images all I have to do is imagine 
the person who’s telephone number it is being chased around the garden by 
a host of flies carrying a garden fork. I visualise the scene like a Tom and 
Jerry cartoon. 

Lets take the next number 323 4423. What I would recommend you do 
here is find a peg word for the first three numbers 323 and then two other peg 
words to represent the numbers 44 and 23 respectively. Personally I think of 
the word Monument to represent the number 323. For 44 you could have the 
word Rare or Roar. For the number 23 you could use the word Numb. 
However, for me, another word sprang to mind for the number 23 which 
conjures up a very vivid picture in my mind when I put all three words 
together to form a link or association. What about the word enema. Lets face 
it the words monument (323) roar (44) and enema (23) conjure up a 
particularly strong image which your not likely to forget in a hurry. I am sure I 
don’t have to spell it out for you! All you have to do now is associate the 
person or organisation with that image. 

210 


You see this is a good example because this image follows the rules 
laid down earlier. To my mind the image is strong and vivid. It is amusing, well 
it is to my warped sense of humour anyway. It has powerful visual content. It 
also used sound as in the word roar. So this association appeals to our 
different senses which will make it much easier to remember later on. This is 
the key to developing a good memory. Things simply have to be made 
memorable. 

211 


What’s in a Name? 


Suppose you want to be able to remember peoples faces after only 
having met them once? This techniques is widely used by business people 
and salesmen because they know it gives them a considerable edge when 
dealing with their customers. People are very flattered when you remember 
them particularly if you can also remember their name. It shows that you have 
made an effort on their part or thought them important enough to want to 
remember them.

 There are a number of characteristics that make up a person’s face. 
First of all there is the overall shape of the head. 

The head can be:


Square, Rectangle, Round, Bulging at the back, Egg shaped, Flat on 
top, or Flat at the back. 

The face similarly be:


Square, Rectangle, Full, Round, Triangular (With the level appearing at 
the top or at the bottom), Narrow. 

The forehead can be:


Low, High, Wide, Narrow, Receding, Bulging, Vertical or Horizontal. 

The nose can be:


Straight, Convex, Concave, Flat, Pug, Pointed, or Bulged. 

The eyes can be:


Large, Small, protruding, Receding, Almond-shaped, Slanting, Cross-
eyed. 

The Eyebrows can be:


Bushy, Thin, Straight, Arch, Meeting in the middle, Separated. 

The mouth can be:


Long, Short, Full lips, Straight lips, Protruding, Long, Short. 

212 


The ear can be:


Large, Small, Triangle, Rectangle, Round, Sticking out, Close to the 
head. 

The chin can be:


Round, Square, Pointed, Jutting, Receding, Cleft, Double. Dimpled. 

You can also consider the colour of the hair. Shape of Moustache or 
beard, hopefully not on a woman! . I bet you had never considered all those 
points before. You see if you can identify one or more strong characteristics 
form a person’s face you are half way there to making an association 
between their looks and their name. You have to be careful about the hair 
because people can often change their hairstyles sometime quite 
dramatically. 

I have not even described the shape or nature of a persons teeth. Do 
they stick out, do they have gaps between them, do they have too many, what 
colour are they? You can go on and on. The point is you don’t have to use all 
these items but just select the ones that seem appropriate. The very fact that 
you are aware of these characteristics means that you have a large number 
of associations, or hooks, that can be used to help you make a mental picture 
in your mind. 

Some people have a bad memory for faces because they think that all 
faces look more or less alike but we all know that is not really true, ignoring 
identical twins for the moment and even then there are often some slight 
tell tale differences. What you have to do is try and identify the most 
prominent aspects of a person’s features. 

What you should try and do is go through a kind of check list every 
time you met someone new:


Age……. 

Face shape…………………… 

Eyes(Colour and Shape)……………….. 

Hair(Colour and Shape/Style)……………. 

Forehead………………………. 

Nose……………………………. 

Lips…………………………….. 

Ears……………………………. 

Chin……………………………. 

213 


By developing you powers of observation you will be well along the 
way to being able to remember a person’s face. Most of us find it more 
difficult to remember a person’s name compared to their face. This because 
again most of us tend to remember visual impressions better than what we 
hear. This is partly because we probably study things with our eyes for longer 
periods of time. This is particularly true when you are introduced to somebody 
new and you are told their name. We are able to study a person’s face for a 
considerable period of time but perhaps only hear a person’s name once. 
There are a few steps you can take to help you remember a person’s name:


1. 
Whenever you are introduced to someone make sure you hear the name 
clearly. As a rule most people fail to make enough of an effort to actually 
hear the name of the person they have been introduced to. If you did not 
hear the name clearly the first time ask them to repeat it again. If you are 
still not sure ask the person who introduced you how the name is spelt. 
You will be surprised that most people will feel flattered that you are 
taking such trouble to show an interest in them. 
2. 
Always repeat the name to yourself or better still out aloud once you have 
heard it. You might say that “ I am very pleased to met you Mr Whitebed.” 
If his name is actually Mr Whithead then they will correct you. Either way 
you get to hear the name out aloud. Try to repeat the name during the 
conversation. 
3. 
If you can try to form an association between their name and their 
appearance. Some names which suggest a colour like Black, White, 
Green, or an occupation like Carpenter, Taylor, make it easier to form the 
connection. So to do names like Spring, March, Winter which denote 
seasons make associations easier. If the person’s surname is Spring you 
could imagine them standing on an enormous spring bouncing around the 
room. The more outrageous, humorous, or ridiculous the image the better 
it will be fixed in your mind. 
Famous names are also easy to form associations with like Churchill, 
Clinton, Nixon, Dillon, Lennon, or McCartney. We all probably have a 
strong image in our minds when we hear those names. All you have to do 
then is link the person you have just met to that image. Again try to make 
it more memorable in some way. If the name is Clinton I am sure there are 
a number of associations which could be made! It does not matter if they 
are sexual or lewd in some way provided you remember them. You not 
going to tell the person what you are thinking. Try not to burst out laughing 
if you association is particularly good! You can use this technique if the 
person has a same name as someone else you know well. In the same 
way you can make some kind of connection between them. 

4. 
If the name does not have any descriptive meaning and so you cannot find 
an obvious connection try and find a descriptive word which come close 
to the phonetic sound of the name. For example if the person’s name is 
“Pickering” you could form an association using the words (Pickerel, 
picket, or pickled as in herring). Perhaps visualise them having their 
214 


pockets filled with pickled herring. Or imagine them eating a vast plate 
filled with herring. The bigger the plate the better of course. 

So to summarise:


1. 
Make sure you hear the name correctly. 
2. 
Repeat the name as soon as you hear it. 
3. 
Form an association between a meaningful name and the person 
preferably using some aspect of their appearance. 
4. 
If there is no meaning in the name find something similar and use 
that. 
Now there is a lot more I could say about the various systems I have 
just mentioned however to do this subject justice would take up another 
course in its own right. For example it is possible to combine the different 
methods to produce a phenomenally powerful system. You can 
compartmentalise the various systems. You can use the link method in 
combination with the phonetic system. Or you can use the room method with 
the phonetic system. Basically the sky is the limit. What I hope I have done is 
introduce to you some ideas and techniques which will enable you to 
dramatically boost your memory power. The tape enclosed is designed to 
word on your subconscious mind because many people think they can’t 
remember things because they have just got into the habit of forgetting. You 
don’t have that excuse any more! 

Some memory experts believe that in order to develop a great memory 
you should stop writing things down or making lists. They believe you should 
get into the habit of storing everything in the mind. Perhaps they are correct 
but personally I really like making lists I enjoy writing things down it is 
probably because I have a bias towards the visual side of things, also some 
things are just so boring I don’t want to clutter up my mind with them! 
Basically there is no right or wrong way to use these techniques you can tailor 
them to suit your own needs. 

Before I close on this release I just want to go through the basics of a 
memory system which some people use to remember foreign languages. 
Obviously if you have a good grounding in a language it makes life a lot 
easier particularly if you were taught Latin at school and you want to learn a 
European language. People with a classical background tend to be better at 
languages because they know what the root of the various words are. 
However for the rest of us we need a little extra help. 

I will use the French language as an example but this system will work 
with all languages provided you have imagination and are adaptable. It works 
best with remembering the names of items, i.e. (nouns). One of the biggest 

215 


problems English people have is remembering the correct genders of words. 

As you probably know Latin based European languages require you to 
know whether an item is masculine or feminine! If your studying German you 
have to deal with an extra category. 

Now I cannot go too far with this here but the general principle is that 
you have to make an association between the French word you are learning 
with an English word or expression that will give you the phonetic sound as 
close as possible to the French word. This is not to be confused with the 
phonetic system mentioned earlier that is quite different. This is your first 
step. The next step is to associate the word with the actual item in question. 
Finally you want to put a gender in there as well. I know this all sounds a bit 
tricky but it is not as hard as you think. For example:


The French word for bedroom is chambre and it is feminine. 
Phonetically this word sounds like shambre however the words I would use 
to remember chambre charm and bra or charm-bra. Now this may sound a bit 
weird at first but I have no problem associating a lady taking off her charming 
bra in her bedroom or thinking of a bedroom filled with charming brightly 
coloured bras. Obviously the word bra has feminine associations so this one 
is an easy example. Also most nouns which in e are feminine anyway but 
not all! Here is another example:


The French word for tap is robinet (m). The way I remember this is to 
think of a friend called Robin dancing on top of a gigantic bathroom tap. I 
imagine him losing his footing and falling into a net i.e. Robin-net. My friend is 
male and so that takes care of the gender. If the word was feminine then I 
would try and think of a girl called robin. 

Now I could go on and on with many examples but I hope I have given 
you the general idea. The key with this system as with all others is to form 
strong associations. Again I could write several releases on this topic alone 
but I just want to give you the general idea for the moment. 

I hope you have found this information useful and I wish you luck in 
using them in your everyday life. Incidentally I have a friend who is widely 
considered to be brilliant at playing bridge. Apparently he used a system 
based on the principals outlined in this course to memorise the cards! 

The cassette enclosed with this months release is designed to work on 
the subconscious mind and feed it with positive suggestions which will help 
you improve your memory on the unconscious level. 

Good Luck! 

216 


Before I go and tell you where you can get the self 
hypnosis tapes here some useful links you may wish 
to look at;


The Negative Calorie Diet WB & CB - Sales of The Negative Calorie Diet 
Workbook & Cookbook eBook (Win95/98 only) [50% commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/20bucks 

The Ultimate Weight Loss eBook! - Sales of the very popular Ultimate Weight Loss 
eBook. Sells for $19.95. [40% commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/123abc 

Acceptance Acupressure Method - Rapid, permanent release from phobias and all 
negative emotions. This simple self-help tool has a 90% success rate. [25% 
commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/haelen 

Stress Control with Power Thinking - Home of Power Thinking for Stress. [25% 
commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/jadua 

The Stress Calming Consultancy - email based stress management training courses. 
[20% commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/stresscalm 

Nutritional Resources - Wholistic Health and Nutrition, Natures Way! [10% 
commission] 

http://hop.clickbank.net/hop.cgi?health1/drhealth 

See The Next Page To get Details Of 
Where You Can Order Your Self-
Hypnosis Tapes:


21 


How To Order Cassettes Tapes! 

In order to help you with your progress through this 
programme there are some Self-Hypnosis tapes that 
accompany the course. The titles are as follows:


(Part Two) Relaxation 
(Part Three) Be Positive 
(Part Four) Goal Setting 
(Part Five) Self-Healing 
(Part Six) Relieve Stress 
(Part Seven) Self-Hypnosis 
(Part Eight) Faster Reading 
(Part Nine) Improving Concentration 
(Part Ten) Improving Memory 

Each Tape costs £ 9.95 or ($ 16). To order any tapes simply 
put a tick next to the tapes you would like to buy and send the 
form back to us enclosing a cheque, postal/money order in 
UK pounds or US Dollars. I am afraid we cannot accept monies in 
any other currencies. Please fill out the details below:


First Name…………………… Second Name………………………. 

Address………………………………………………………………….. 

…………………………………………………………………………….. 

………………………………………Country………………………… 

E-Mail…………………………………. 

Send the form to:


A.C. Mail Order, 291 Kirkdale, Sydenham, 
London, SE26 4QET. 
E-Mail acmail@acmailorder.co.uk 
