The next morning, I looked for Simon to return, but as the time sped on, I realized that it was likely I’d miss
him. But where was he? What had held him up?
I wrote a hasty note and left it with Mrs. Hennessey, and then there was nothing for it but to find a cab to
take us to the railway station. I even looked over my shoulder before we turned the corner, to see if Simon’s
motorcar was in sight.
The train was crowded, as usual, and Lydia and I had difficulty finding two seats together. She was
embarrassed that I had to pay for her ticket, but she promised to see that I was recompensed as soon as
she reached Vixen Hill.
I said as we pulled out of the station into the misting rain, “Won’t it be awkward—a guest arriving without
any warning? Perhaps we should have sent a telegram. After all, your family is in mourning.”
“I’d considered that, but I think it will be best just to walk in without fanfare. And Roger will very likely be as
grateful as I am for your presence. There’s the awkwardness, you see, of meeting for the first time. I have no
idea what to say—or what he’ll do. It’s so difficult to know, isn’t it?”
She’d persuaded herself that my presence would make all well again. But I had my doubts. Quarrels were
not always settled so easily—or so amicably. Roger Ellis could see her flight to London as a more serious
infraction than his blow. I was beginning to see that Simon was right, this was a more complicated business
than I’d foreseen. Mainly because Lydia herself was far more uncertain than I’d realized.
“Are you sure,” I asked, “that this is the right thing to do? Perhaps we should have waited another day until
you’re more comfortable with returning. It would be simple enough to get down at the next stop.”
“Oh, no, I want to put it behind me as quickly as possible.”
We talked for some time after that, exchanging information to make it appear more likely that she’d
known me for some time.
“Wasn’t it difficult,” she asked at one point, “to work with badly wounded men? I know how distressing it
was to care for Alan in his last days. Roger was wounded, you know. In the shoulder. He never told us, and it
mustn’t have been severe, because he wasn’t sent back to England.” She bit her lip. “It was George who
mentioned it. He’s a friend of the family. He’d run into Roger in France. But I hadn’t seen Roger for three
years. Not until he came home because of Alan. And he treated me like a stranger. As if he couldn’t
remember those months before the war when we were so happy.”
“War does change people,” I pointed out. “And of course there was his brother.”
“Yes, I know,” she said wistfully. “I shouldn’t have pressed. But I wanted so badly to have a child. Someone
to love, if—if the worst happens. That’s what we quarreled about, you see.” She touched her face. “The hurt
went deeper than the blow. That’s why I couldn’t stay at Vixen Hill.”
This was the truth, finally.
“We are a house of widows,” she went on. “For all intents and purposes these last three years, I have
been one as well. Roger’s mother and his grandmother live with us, and I could see that their children have
been their salvation. He may never come back from France, once he leaves. This could be our only chance.”
I hurried back toward the inn with my purchases and met Simon coming to find me.
“No one seems to know the name Halloran. He’s changed it. He must have done.”
I told him about my conversation with Willy. “He knows something. He must. He wanders through the
village at will, and people are so accustomed to seeing him that they almost overlook him. Or else he’s our
killer.”
“Keep looking. I’ll go with you. Mrs. Ellis is exhausted. I asked the rector to take her home with him.”
“He’s been so clever thus far, Simon. Why take Sophie? What earthly good will it do him?”
“Something frightened him. And there was no time to plan.”
The rector’s motorcar was passing us, on the way to the Rectory. I smiled at Mrs. Ellis and waved.
“Simon. Remember the night when Willy came into the inn yard to inspect your motorcar?”
“I do.”
“You’re Army. One has only to look at you. Is that why Willy was anxious to find out about you? Was he
once Army too?”
“There’s Margaret’s husband. And that Major of yours.”
“Henry is artillery. So, come to think of it, was the Major. And he isn’t mine.”
Just ahead of me I could see Constable Bates coming out of the inn. I called to him and hurried to catch
him up.
“We’re looking for Willy, Constable. Have you seen him?”
“I have not, Sister. Is it important? I’ll carry a message for you.”
“Just tell him that I need urgently to speak to him. Thank you, Constable.”
As he walked off, I said, “Did you search everywhere, Simon?”
“As well as I could. Ellis told me what to look for.”
We began again, knocking on every door, taking people from their dinners, rattling the doors of closed
shops until someone came to let us in.
No one had seen Willy.
“Where does he sleep?” I asked.
But no one knew.
When anyone asked, I told them I’d bought gloves and a scarf for him.
“You’ll spoil him,” the baker’s wife told me flatly. “I don’t hold with beggars.”
Willy’s wet gloves were still dripping on the bush where he’d hung them. He hadn’t come for them when
my back was turned.
When we asked the stationer where Willy slept, he replied, “In the old livery stable, that’s now a garage.
There’s a shed out back he’s allowed to use. Keeps him out of doorways. Not good for business, having to
step over a beggar on the stoop.”
The livery stable cum garage was close by the railway station, where the carriage was kept. I thanked him
as Simon touched my arm and said, “We’ll drive. It saves time.”
His motorcar was still in the inn yard. In the glow of the headlamps as we drove to the station, I saw a hare
zigzagging across in front of us before darting into the dry brush at the side of the road.
A little farther on, Constable Bates was coming toward us, and Simon pulled over. “Any word?” he asked.
“No, sir. I was just coming from the station. He sometimes sleeps in the ticket office.”
And we went on our way, the livery stable already clear in our headlamps. As we neared, I could hear the
stamp of horses’ hooves, and once the sound of one blowing. Simon and I left the motorcar ticking over and
went around back to where the shed stood at the end of the yard, ramshackle and bare of paint, the boards
a silvery gray in Simon’s torchlight. The door hinges were rusty and squeaked loudly as he dragged the
door open.
I shone the torch into the black interior, glad of the shelter of the door as the wind blew hard across the
bare fields beyond.
The shed was barely large enough to hold the battered old mattress on the floor. A peg for clothing was
on one side, and on the other, a spirit lamp for making tea. A tin stood on the shelf above, and a cracked jar
that held a little honey.
And it was only marginally warmer than the outside. I shivered at the thought of living here through the
winter.
“No wonder the man begs,” I said.
Shutting the door again, we turned back toward the motorcar. In the darkness I tripped over something
underfoot, nearly sprawling on my face in the torn grass of the yard.
Simon put his torch on whatever it was, saying, “Careful. These old stables are a minefield. Horseshoes,
wire—” He broke off as the light caught the side of a torn shoe, and then came back again to pin it squarely
in its beam.
“Willy was wearing that shoe when I met him. Just over an hour ago.”
“No one said anything about the man sleeping in the railway station. Except Constable Bates.”
He flashed the light around, but there were no other signs that anyone had been here before us. Then he
walked to the barn where the carriage horses were kept, shifting the door to walk inside. “Stay here,” he
said to me, and I stopped in the doorway. He disappeared for a minute or more, then came back to where I
was standing. “One of the horses is sweating. Someone rode him recently.”
“And there’s no train at this hour of the night.” I could just see his face in the faint light of the stars as we
made our way back to the motorcar. “What’s more, I don’t remember the carriage in Hartfield. Not tonight.”
“No. But there must be a way to reach the heath without going through the village, if you are leading a
horse. I think we’ve found our killer.”
“Constable Bates?” I felt a surge of relief that it wasn’t anyone from Vixen Hill. “Do you think he’s Sergeant
Halloran? Yes, it would explain— Simon, I told him I was searching for Willy. I’m responsible.”
“You had no way of guessing.”
As we drove back to Hartfield, I said, “It was Constable Bates who found the tracks where George
Hughes and Davis Merrit met and then walked on together. Inspector Rother praised him for that bit of
excellent police work. But he must have been following Merrit and saw them together. He was already
suspicious of Merrit, surely. Who did he kill first, do you think? George or Davis Merrit?”
“Merrit. Before he could ride back to Hartfield. And then Hughes.”
“Yes, of course. He could have hidden Merrit’s body until George was dead, then arranged his supposed
suicide. Simon, he was right under our noses. At the heart of the inquiry. Able to cover his tracks. But why
take Sophie? I can understand about Willy. I’d wanted to question him, and that was too dangerous. Men
like Willy can remember, sometimes.”
We had reached Hartfield, and I scanned every face, searching for Constable Bates. Instead I saw Roger
Ellis, just pulling into the inn yard as we came up. In the glare from his headlamps, his face looked haggard.
“Anything?” he asked, hailing us as we slowed.
I said quickly, “We’ve been searching for Willy. He’s missing— I think we’ve just found his shoe.” I was
about to add that we feared that Constable Bates was involved, but for some reason I stopped myself. This
was hardly the place. . . .
“Good God—why Willy?”
“It’s possible he saw who took Sophie.”
Just then Lydia and Gran drove up. Gran’s face told me that they’d had no more luck than Roger had. Her
usually stiff back was hunched with fatigue.
“Any news?” Lydia asked quickly. But I shook my head.
“Lydia, why don’t you take your grandmother home?” I asked. “Henry would be glad to take her place, I’m
sure.”
Gran protested, but Roger said to her, “No, really, you must rest a little.”
Lydia was saying, “I won’t stop searching.” Anxiety was plain in her voice. “And there’s the old mill. We
haven’t gotten there yet. And I must ask the hotel for the use of a blanket. I don’t know if whoever took
Sophie thought about wrapping her well.”
Roger hesitated, then said, “I’ll take Gran home. Lydia, go with Bess. I’ll bring Henry back with me.”
“I thought you were to look at the windmill?” Simon asked, turning to him.
Lydia said, “He asked me to. He was going to The Pitch. Where Davis Merrit’s body was found. But I
stopped at Vixen Hill for a blanket for Gran’s knees, and it wasn’t until we left there that Gran said we should
have taken another for Sophie.” She shivered. “They used to claim the mill was haunted. Some tragedy or
other, years ago. And it’s hardly more than a ruin. I thought it was a waste of time.”
Simon glanced at Roger. “Is that true?”
“True enough. I haven’t been there in three years.”
I said, “Still—it’s the only place we haven’t looked. Simon—we ought to hurry.”
Lydia said, “Wait for me!” Leaving the motorcar by the inn, she came quickly over to ours.
Roger, visibly torn between going with us and his concern for his grandmother, said, “I’ll follow as quickly
as I can.”
“Search the grounds at Vixen Hill. It’s where the doctor’s body was left,” Simon told him, and then we were
away, keeping to a steady pace through the rest of Hartfield, and then driving fast as we reached the heath,
holding the heavy motorcar on the track.
I said to Simon, “It’s possible we will find both of them there. If he’s hurt that child—!”
“I don’t know why he took her,” he said grimly. “He has nothing to gain by harming her.”
“Don’t even think it,” Lydia said from the rear seat, her voice frightened.
“Tell us where to find the turning,” I said to her over my shoulder. “I can’t be sure I’ll recognize it in the
dark.”
“And I don’t understand why anyone would want to harm Willy. He’s not very bright, and he muddles things.
Whoever is doing this must be mad.”
The motorcar rocked, as if shaken by a giant hand, then steadied as we bounced high over a deeper rut. I
could see sheep, ghostly white, staring at us as we passed, as if we were the ones who were mad.
“We think it must be Constable Bates.” I explained to her what had happened. “I’d made the mistake of
telling him that I was searching for Willy. Constable Bates must have gone to look for him straightaway.”
“But where is Willy now? Surely not the mill—how would Bates get him there?”
Simon told her about the horse. “And I saw him earlier, before all this began, driving the Inspector’s
motorcar.”
She leaned forward. “He’s the one who always frightened me. The one with the cold eyes. But he’s a
policeman. Why would he murder someone? I know, I know. The court-martial. Still, this man Halloran could
be someone else, quietly living in another part of the Forest.”
“There’s that,” Simon agreed, but I could tell he didn’t believe it.
“Has he lived here for very long? Does his family come from here?” I asked.
“I know almost nothing about him. Constable Austin could probably tell you more. I think something was
said about Constable Bates coming from Cornwall, but I don’t know if that’s true or not. At a guess, he’s
been here two years? I know Constable Freeman died of cancer the first year of the war, and it was hard to
find a replacement. Oh—there’s the turning!”
We nearly missed it. Simon stopped as quickly as he could, then reversed. I could see as the headlamps
swept it that our way was going to be much rougher here. A horse made sense.
About three miles down the track we were now traveling, I thought I could see the windmill ahead against
the night sky, blotting out the stars. The top was misshapen, as if it had rotted through, and the arms were
mere skeletons. I pointed it out to Simon.
“That’s it,” Lydia said, from just behind my shoulder. “I don’t think it’s been used since Roger’s
grandfather’s day. There’s a new mill on the road to Groombridge.”
Simon switched off the headlamps, pulling over to the edge of the track.
“We ought to walk from here,” he said quietly. “Sounds carry in the night.”
He got out, and I followed him, asking Lydia to wait in the motorcar.
“I’d rather come with you,” she said in a small voice, and I remembered that she had not cared for the
heath at night.
“You’ll be all right. Use the horn if anyone comes near you. Anyone. We dare not leave the motorcar
empty.”
“Yes, all right,” she said, climbing into the driver’s seat. I saw her rest her hand on the horn.
And then Simon and I were off across the heath. It was rough going, although the stark black shapes of
the wind-twisted heather and gorse were easy enough to see. It was the roots sprawling out between them
that caught at our feet. Simon had taken my hand to guide me, and together we made fairly good time.
The windmill grew larger. Bare of sails, it looked ominous against the night sky. The black weathered
wood looked as if it had come from the gorse under our feet.
“There must be an opening,” I said and nearly went flat on my face as the toe of my shoe snagged a root.
“The other side.”
We reached the mill, and it was easier going, a cleared space around it not yet swallowed up by the
heath. There was a window higher up, but I didn’t think anyone was there. Still, we were more easily spotted
than someone inside the shadowed interior.
“He’s not here.”
Simon leaned over to whisper against my hair. “Don’t be too sure. There must be another way in.”
Making our way silently around the rough wooden sides, we found a door. It was merely a blacker
rectangle, standing half open, as if it had been left that way so long ago that the door had petrified in that
position. A torch gave too much light. I reached into my pocket for matches, and pressed several into
Simon’s palm.
It was then I heard the whimpering, like a puppy left alone in the dark.
I would have dashed inside without thinking but for Simon’s hand clamping down on my shoulder. I winced
and stood still.
We waited, straining to hear the smallest sounds from inside. But there was nothing, not even the
scurrying of a rat.
Simon struck a match and held it just inside.
Shadows danced about the walls, but we could see very little. Part of the upper floor had come down, half
filling the ground floor.
“All right,” he said. “I’ll go first.” And lighting a second match, he stepped inside as quickly as if he were
entering the tent of a suspected tribesman. I tried to see around him, but he was blocking my view. A third
match, and then he said, “All clear. Watch out. There are timbers everywhere, and Willy’s body is just
beyond the door.”
“And Sophie?”
“She’s on the stone. I think she’s well enough. I could see eyes peering at me.”
He flicked on his torch, the light blinding both of us, and we had to stand still until our eyes adjusted to it.
As soon as I could pick out her shape, I walked over to Sophie. She opened her arms to me, and I picked
her up.
“I don’t like it,” she said to me in French. “Dark.”
“Yes, darling, we’ll have you out of here quickly. Simon, she’s all right. How is Willy?”
He was bending over the man. “There’s blood on the back of his head. But he’s still breathing.”
“There’s the scarf in the motorcar. I meant it for him. We can bind his head with that. But how do we get
him there?”
Simon was rummaging around now and discovered some sacks in a corner, but they were filthy and
rotting.
“Lydia can take Sophie, and then I’ll be free to help you.” I stepped outside and called to her.
She refused to come at first, then stepped down from the motorcar and whimpering almost in imitation of
Sophie, she made her way through the dark. When she finally reached me, she gripped my arm with
anxious fingers. “Why would anyone do this to a child? I find it hard to believe.” Taking Sophie from me, she
shivered as she looked down at Willy. “How did anyone manage to bring him here?”
“The station carriage horses, at a guess,” Simon answered her. “Or the motorcar.”
She started back the way she’d come, picking her footing carefully.
I watched until she reached the motorcar, and then went back to Simon. I found that he’d brought Willy
around. The man was sitting up, holding his head, moaning.
“Can you walk, if we help you?” Simon asked him.
“Dizzy,” Willy said. “Sick.”
Shining Simon’s torch on the back of Willy’s head, I could see bone shining through the bloody tear in his
scalp, pinkish white in the light.
“Gently. His skull may be fractured,” I warned Simon, and then bent to take Willy’s arm. “Will you try?” I
asked him.
He smelled. And I wondered if there might be lice in the folds of his clothing as we supported him
between us.
It took us nearly ten minutes to persuade him that he could walk. Even so, he gagged twice as we got him
to his feet.
“Close your eyes,” I told him. “Let us guide you.”
And so we got him moving, slowly taking him through the gorse, stumbling and begging us to stop, once
falling to his knees and refusing to stand again.
When we reached the motorcar, he put out a hand to touch it, as if uncertain that it was really there. Then
he half stepped, half relapsed into the rear seat.
Five minutes later, we were on our way back to Hartfield.
I was questioning Willy, but he couldn’t remember being attacked or who had taken him to the mill.
Groaning, he held his head in his hands, motion sick from the blow.
In the seat next to Simon, Lydia was asking Sophie what had happened to her, but all she would say was
that the man had told her he had a cat.
I said to Simon, “How are we to prove any of this?”
“I’ll call London straightaway and get someone down here. Meanwhile, the doctor is dead. Someone
ought to take Willy to the one you mentioned from Groombridge.”
I could see that Willy’s wound was bleeding profusely, already soaking through the wool scarf I’d used to
bandage it.
When we came to the turning, Simon suggested taking Lydia and the child to Vixen Hill, where Margaret
and Henry were waiting for news. “She’ll be safe there.”
We did that, making certain that Henry and his wife knew what to expect, and then Willy, Simon, and I
headed toward Hartfield.
We stopped at the Rectory, and Mr. Smyth agreed to convey Willy to Groombridge, and his sister went
with him. Mrs. Ellis had fallen into a restless sleep, and I agreed to sit with her. We managed to move Willy
to the Smyth motorcar, and then Simon and I were alone, standing there in the windy High Street.
“I must put in a call to London,” he said. “They’ll send someone.”
And he was gone. I stood there in the darkness, feeling the weight of exhaustion overwhelming me.
Where was Constable Bates?
Ten minutes later, Simon came back out to where I was waiting. “Bates was Halloran’s mother’s name.
Her nephew, one Thomas Bates, was a constable in Cornwall before the war. Apparently he was among the
missing on the Somme. Halloran must have assumed his identity, claiming a medical discharge. I expect no
one here in Sussex doubted his credentials. If he conducted himself properly, there would be no reason to
question them.”
“And who would look for a deserter in a village constable? The police are so shorthanded, thanks to the
war. I remember Inspector Herbert complaining about that in London.”
“At any rate, the Army is sending men posthaste to help us find him and take him in charge.”
I went back to the Rectory and found Mrs. Ellis awake and in the parlor, looking for the rector or his sister.
“What’s happened?” she asked, her face white with fear. “Don’t keep it from me!”
I took her into the kitchen and set about making tea, all the while giving her a brief account of what we had
discovered.
“Oh, thank God,” she said when I’d finished. “I thought the rector might have gone because—because
someone was dead.” After a moment, she went on. “You don’t know—I thought—I thought God was
punishing me. Taking her from me a second time. I didn’t want her to pay for my sins.” Then, without
warning, she began to cry.
“She’s safe, Mrs. Ellis,” I said. “And no harm came to her. She was a little frightened in the dark, but that
was all. There’s nothing to fear.”
“I killed them, you know.” She raised her head to look at me. Tears were streaming down her face. “And
when I saw Sophie, I thought God had forgiven me. But he hadn’t. I don’t deserve Sophie.”
I felt cold. “Killed whom?”
“Juliana. And then Alan. They were suffering so, and there was nothing to be done. I couldn’t watch it any
longer. The doctor had told me it would be a matter of hours. He gave me laudanum to help me through the
end. But I gave a little to Juliana, and she simply went to sleep. It was so quiet, so peaceful. I was so
grateful. And I asked for laudanum again when Alan was dying. And I helped him through the end. You’re a
nurse, have you never wished for something, anything, to end the pain of those in your charge?”
Swallowing my shock, I said, “It was wrong. You know that.”
“God forgive me, I do. That’s why I was willing to take the blame for the other deaths, I thought I could
make amends.”
What to do? Did I call the police and hand this woman over to them? She had lost her husband and
buried two children as well. Could it be proved that the amount of laudanum she gave her dying daughter
and her dying son had speeded up their deaths? Or changed the manner of their deaths? I wasn’t a doctor, I
didn’t know. Perhaps it only eased her to think so.
“Mrs. Ellis.”
“I know. I’ve told you. A nursing sister. I want a little peace, you see. I want to be punished, so that the rest
of my family will be safe. Please. Help me.”
“Your family needs you. I can’t give you absolution for what you did. Nor can I hold you accountable,
because I wasn’t there. I have only your word, not that of a doctor. You must make your peace in another
way. Perhaps Mr. Smyth can help you.”
She broke down again, too tired to stop the tears. And I did what I could to comfort her. When she was
quieter, I told her I must find Simon, to see if he or Roger had had any success explaining the situation to
Inspector Rother.
“Yes, go see to it,” she said, taking my hand for a moment. “Thank you, Bess.”
I knelt by her chair. “You won’t do anything foolish?”
“No. Sadly, I don’t have the courage. But I think it helped to confess. I’ve held it in so long.”
I left her there to finish her tea, the pot beside her, and walked back to the hotel.
The first person I saw as I came through the door into Reception was Constable Bates. He was walking
down the main stairs, as if he were coming from one of the rooms on the floor above. It was an ideal place
to stay out of sight, with windows overlooking the street.
My first thought was, Where is Simon? He’d been here when I left only half an hour ago.
Chapter Nineteen
Bates read
Bates read my face even before I could speak.
Moving quickly down the remaining stairs, he was coming across Reception directly toward me. And I
was all that was between him and the door. And escape.
I stayed where I was, wishing that I still had that small pistol that Simon had once given me.
The hotel clerk stepped out of the inner office, saying, “Miss Crawford?” and for an instant distracted my
attention. And in that same moment, Constable Bates walked straight into me and spun me toward the
desk. My ribs took the brunt of the blow, and I caught my breath with the pain. And then, with both hands
gripping the edge of the desk, ignoring my ribs, I pushed myself away and turned as quickly as I could to go
after him, well aware that he had nothing to lose.
Behind me the desk clerk cried, “Miss? Constable?”
I ignored him. Bates was moving briskly toward the motorcar standing in the corner of the inn yard. I
thought it was Mrs. Ellis’s vehicle.
He bent to turn the crank, his eyes on me, gauging my approach. The motor caught, and he was behind
the wheel in a flash. Without warning he spun it and turned toward me, gunning the motor, heading straight
for me at speed.
I stood there for an instant, uncertain which way to move. And then at the last second, ignoring my ribs
again, I flung myself toward the inn’s door.
He veered just in time to avoid hanging up the front wheels on the inn’s steps and kept going out the
Groombridge road, toward the north.
I ran for Simon’s motorcar, just beyond where Mrs. Ellis’s vehicle had been left, and turned the crank like
a madwoman. It was late enough that the road was empty, and I gave the big motorcar its head, the
headlamps sweeping the road.
Someone darted out in front of me, waving, and I spun the wheel to miss hitting him, seeing Simon’s face
at the last minute.
I pulled on the brake with all my strength, and the vehicle slithered to a sputtering stop, spraying stones
and earth in almost a bow wave.
Simon swung himself into the vehicle, and I was able to keep the motor from stalling. Straightening us up,
I went after Constable Bates as fast as I dared.
“Where were you?” I asked, not turning my head.
Simon, out of breath, said, “Arguing with Rother. I saw what happened. You shouldn’t have taken on Bates
alone. He’s dangerous. He’s killed four men, counting that officer in France, and he did his best to kill Willy.
He won’t stop at you.”
“He’s already tried,” I told him, and heard the low growl in his throat.
“We’ll see about friend Bates,” he said and leaned forward to watch the road. In a straightaway I could just
pick out the round red rear lamp ahead of us. But I was closing the gap quickly.
“Why did Bates have to kill Dr. Tilton?” I asked. “He wasn’t at the court-martial.”
“Dr. Tilton conducted Merrit’s postmortem. He tied the two deaths together. That’s why Inspector Rother
abandoned the idea of suicide, even though at first it appeared to be one. The question is, what else did
Tilton find? Or what was Constable Bates afraid he’d found?”
“Inspector Rother wouldn’t tell us anything. Simon—what if he didn’t know? What if Dr. Tilton had told
Constable Bates what he’d discovered, but Bates never passed it on because it would change the whole
investigation? Yes, of course. That’s why Inspector Rother was going around in circles. If he was getting
impatient—if he was on the point of speaking to the doctor himself—” The wheel jerked in my hands as we
hit a deeper rut this time.
“Keep your attention on the road!”
I set my teeth, concentrating on driving. The rear lamp was brighter, sharper now.
“Should I try to stop him? Or just keep up with him for now?”
“For God’s sake, don’t use my motorcar as a battering ram. Try to run him off the road if you can.”
“Yes, all right.”
I caught up with Constable Bates finally and began to torment him. I’d seen my male friends play this
game with each other—making an effort to pass, rushing up and then pulling back a little, flashing the
headlamps. It was a dangerous business, but it was the only weapon I had.
And then I realized that I was making Constable Bates jittery. He could drive, but he wasn’t an
experienced driver. The constant threat of us passing him on this narrow road was requiring all his coping
skills, and when he veered the wrong way, trying to second-guess me, I took advantage of the small space
he’d given me and sped up.
Beside me, Simon swore in Urdu, but I ignored him.
The verge of the road was only a little rougher than the unmade center with its winter ruts and holes. I
bounced over low-growing gorse, gave the motor more power to deal with it, and forged ahead.
For a second I thought that Constable Bates was going to sideswipe us in his fright. But trying to watch
me and manage the motorcar at the same time was too much. Suddenly he lost complete control, and the
vehicle thundered wildly across a field lumpy with last summer’s crops toward a copse of trees that marked
a bend in the road.
Simon yelled, “Watch yourself,” but I had the motorcar under control and began to slow for the bend, even
as Constable Bates came to a grinding halt. And I thought, That’s how George Hughes must have felt when
he nearly collided with that length of tree trunk.
Simon was out the door almost before I had slowed enough to make it safe for him to find his footing.
Then he was sprinting across the rough field, and I watched, holding my breath, for fear he would twist an
ankle as he leapt over obstacles and dealt with the deeper rows between the remnants of the crop.
Constable Bates, stunned by his abrupt contact with the steering wheel and the windscreen, was not as
quick. But he was running before Simon could reach him, heading for the deep shadows of the trees. They
were just disappearing from my sight in the darkness when I saw Simon hurl himself after Bates, and then
they both went down.
I swung the motorcar so that the great headlamps pointed in their direction, and it was like watching a
shadow show, one minute seeing only silhouettes and the next, a shoulder or an arm raised high, a head
flung back.
I scrabbled in the floor of the motorcar, looking for a torch or any other weapon that I could use.
Just under the other seat, my fingers closed over a sheet of crumpled paper. I brought it up and tried to
read it in the glow of the headlamps.
Get out of Forest, or child dies.
It was intended for Simon, the Army man. And in the dark we hadn’t seen it where the wind must have
tossed it off the seat.
Furious, I pulled on the brake, leaving the motor running, and was out of my door, running through the long
bright beams of the headlamps, my shadow looming ahead of me like some black, disembodied thing with
a will of its own. I nearly tripped over a length of fallen branch, and reaching down to retrieve it, I kept going.
I could hear them clearly, the grunts and blows of two men who were well matched, and I knew fear of
capture must be driving the constable. There was nothing left to him but the rope. Simon nearly had him
subdued when Bates’s hand came up and raked the long wound that ran down Simon’s face. As Simon
arched back, out of reach, Bates ducked and plowed his head straight toward Simon’s chest.
Simon had seen the move coming, and as nimble as a bullfighter, he sidestepped before bringing both
fists down in a single blow to the unprotected back of the other man’s head.
Constable Bates went down as if he had been poleaxed, and Simon, stepping clear of the man’s body,
turned to me, breathing hard.
“And what the hell did you think you were going to do with that tree limb?” He pointed to the length of
wood I was holding like a cricket bat. “That’s rotten. Didn’t you see?”
I looked down at my unlikely weapon. The part in my hand felt solid enough.
“I was coming to your rescue,” I said. “I wasn’t going to let him get away.”
“Did he look as if he was going to get away?”
We glared at each other. And then we both began to laugh. He reached down and took the offending
branch from my hand, tossed it aside, and put his arms around me. “My dearest girl,” he said gently, “your
father is right, you are afraid of nothing. And that can be very dangerous, has anyone told you that?”
His embrace was comforting. It had been a long day, and I had carried enough burdens.
And then without a word, I handed him the slip of paper I’d found in his motorcar, telling him what was
written on it.
“Bastard,” he said under his breath, and then to me he added, “Where was it? I never saw it.”
“It had fallen under a seat.”
“All right, as Hamlet said, shall we lug the guts into another room? At least as far as my motorcar. Then
we’ll try to get the Ellis vehicle back on the road. Or not, as the case may be. Can you manage his feet?”
We put the still unconscious Constable Bates/Sergeant Halloran into Simon’s motorcar, then managed
after several attempts to get the Ellis motorcar out of the field. Soon we were driving sedately back to
Hartfield, in tandem.
Alone in the motorcar, following Simon, I could hear Mrs. Ellis’s voice in the darkness around me. I didn’t
know what to do about it. I didn’t know what to do about Sophie, except to hand her over to Simon and my
father to return her to the nuns in Rouen.
It was a long night. Simon stayed with me as we made our explanations to a very angry Inspector Rother.
He refused to believe me at first, just as he’d refused to believe Simon and Roger Ellis, accusing us of
trying to distract him from the Ellis family. Constable Bates had served the Forest well for nearly two years,
responsible and capable. He couldn’t be a deserter under the sentence of death. He’d been invaluable to
the inquiry. And so on.
Close to dawn, when Army officials arrived from London, Inspector Rother was finally satisfied that
Sergeant Halloran and Constable Bates were one and the same.
And when Constable Austin was sent to search the small cottage where Constable Bates had lived, he
found a broken walking stick, the length of an officer’s swagger stick, with the blunt end still sticky with
Willy’s hair and blood. I was so grateful that it hadn’t been the marble kitten after all.
I went to see how Willy was faring. Mr. Smyth had taken him in. The doctor from Groombridge told me that
with care, Willy would survive with no ill effects. The scarf was a loss, but I laid the new gloves on his pillow.
He didn’t seem to remember what had become of his own.
Gran, her face gray with fatigue, was finally allowed to take Mrs. Ellis home. Roger was coming to drive
them, after a few final words with the rector.
She and I had only a few seconds together as I held her door and Simon bent to turn the crank. Gran was
speaking to Inspector Rother, giving him her views of overly keen policemen harassing peaceful citizens.
I said to Mrs. Ellis, “I told you earlier that I can’t give you absolution for what you did. But for your family’s
sake, you must find the courage to put it behind you. It will hurt them terribly if they knew. Your penance must
be their happiness.”
She put up a hand and touched my face. “You are a dear girl, Bess. I was haunted ever after by what I’d
done. I thought my husband’s suicide was my punishment. But when George was killed and I saw his lifeless
body there in the water, I realized that I was no better than a murderer myself. And that there is no
punishment that befits taking another’s life. Under any circumstances.” She swallowed her tears. “I loved
them so dearly.”
“I know. Sometimes love tries to do too much.”
And then they were driving away.
Simon came to me and said, “What about the child?”
“I’m too weary to think. I’m overdue in France. But Inspector Rother can deal with that. I must get word to
Sister Marie Joseph—but I don’t know where to find them after the fire!” The realization was like a blow. “It’s
all to do over again, searching for them. And what shall I do with Sophie, meanwhile? I can’t take her to
Somerset. I can’t change her world a third time.”
He pulled me into his arms and held me until I was calmer.
“You need sleep, Bess. Tomorrow we’ll deal with Sophie and the nuns.”
“I should go back to France tonight. And what about that poor Major’s motorcar?”
“The war will keep. So will the motorcar.”
I laughed, and he let me go.
“The war might wait,” I said ruefully, “but Matron is likely to kill me.”
He drove me to Dover the next afternoon, after I’d given the police my statement, and I’d said good-bye to
Roger Ellis, who had come into town to speak to me.
He too was on his way back to France, his orders sending him through Portsmouth.
He stood before me, trying to find the words he wanted to say.
I shook my head. “I don’t like leaving Sophie in Vixen Hill any more than you do. But I have no choice until I
find Sister Marie Joseph.”
“I don’t know what to do about her,” he told me truthfully. “She’s probably mine, isn’t she?”
“She’s legally Sophie Hebert. You told me. I’d leave it at that. Even if you adopt her.”
“Yes. You can’t know how many times I’ve regretted that night.”
“I don’t think Claudette did. She gave her husband a child, even though he didn’t live to see it. Did you
ever think that Sophie might, one day, inherit his property? She deserves it. When the war is over, you could
see that her interests are protected.”
“I shall.” He took my hand, then leaned forward and kissed me on the cheek. “I hated you when I first met
you. God keep you safe.”
“And you as well.”
He was gone, and Simon was ready to leave. He had already arranged for someone to transport the
Major’s vehicle safely back to Dover. I stepped into the motorcar and leaned back against the seat.
“I would so much like to go home to Somerset.” I’d spoken to my mother and the Colonel Sahib on the
inn’s telephone. Their voices had sounded so near, I felt the distance sharply.
“I know. Next time.”
When I landed in France, it was the darkness before dawn, and the streets of Rouen seemed empty, even
the new recruits gone up toward the fighting.
But across the water as we had moved toward the quay and set about docking came the call of an
Australian kingfisher, and I stood by the rail, waving a white handkerchief in response.
Sergeant Larimore was there to greet me when we were allowed to disembark. He looked better than I’d
seen him since he’d been wounded, though still a little singed around the edges.
“You got back safely, I see,” I said.
“It’s the saintly life I lead,” he assured me. “They fussed over the burns and my bravery, and the fact that I’d
passed out from the pain and couldn’t report back to the Base Hospital.”
And I was sure there was a hint of canary feathers around his mouth as he added, “I told the nuns, Bess. I
traced them and I confessed to what I’d done. And I told them Sophie was safe, that she’d be brought back
to France if they wished.”
“Dear God. What did they say?” I stopped stock-still, waiting for another blow to fall.
“They were that grateful. I had a long and very serious lecture from Sister Marie Joseph about the dire
effects of impulsive behavior. They’re being moved to a house in Lille, the nuns and the children with them.
She gave me the direction. And the direction of that lawyer on Fish Street.”
“The Street of Fishes.”
“Aye, well, I’m a sheep farmer, I can’t speak the language.”
I laughed. “You’re the canniest sheep farmer I know.”
“I should hope so. At any rate, the good Sister told me she would consider a proper request for Sophie to
live in England, as long as she is taught about her parents and the nuns who protected her.”
We walked on. “I must write to Roger Ellis. He’s on his way back to France. He’ll have to see to it, and
contact the solicitor.”
“As to that,” Sergeant Larimore said, more canary feathers drifting around his cheeky head, “I paid that
gentleman a friendly call. Said I was best mates with this Ellis chap, and he’s willing to represent him.”
“Sergeant Larimore, you’re incorrigible!”
“Aren’t I just?” He shifted my valise to the other arm, and said, “Do you know the French think there’s a
German spy in the bulrushes down along the river? I’ve been here for every ship landing, waiting for you.
Only yesterday they sent another detachment of soldiers to scour the banks. If you hadn’t come soon, I was
likely to be shot as a spy.”
I laughed.
But I had also noticed that he was wearing not the blue serge of the Base Hospital but his uniform.
“Are you healed?”
“Not completely,” he informed me. “But if you’re going back to the forward dressing station, I don’t see any
point in lingering here. I’ll just get myself wounded again and you can save me this time. The Aborigines
have a saying, you know. That if you save a man’s life, he’s yours as long as he lives.”
“I don’t believe a word of it. Besides, if it were true, you already belong to another nursing sister.”
He chuckled complacently, shortening his stride to match mine. “Ah, but it was the doctor who saved me
that time. And he doesn’t count.”
“Was Alan married? Did he have children?”
“He was married, yes. But he and Eleanor had no children. And neither do Margaret and Henry. She’s
Roger’s sister, she lives near Canterbury.”
“And Juliana?”
“No. Of course not.”
She was silent for a time. Then she said, “Sometimes I think they’re cursed. Margaret and Alan and
Roger. Mama Ellis told me once that Juliana’s death was devastating. It scarred all of them. Roger’s father
couldn’t accept it. He tried, but in the end he went out into the heath and shot himself.”
I was shocked. “She’s dead?” It was all I could manage to say.
“She died when she was only six years old. Of a mastoid tumor. Roger won’t speak her name. It’s as if
she never existed. He was closer to her in age than Margaret and Alan. Alan, when he came of age, turned
Vixen Hill over to Roger. He felt he couldn’t live there, and he bought a house in Portsmouth before joining
the Navy as a career officer. Margaret married young. I think to escape. Although it turned out well enough.
She and Henry have been very happy.”
“Did you—were you told these things before you married Roger Ellis?” I asked.
“I told myself I’d make Roger forget Juliana. But you can’t really change people, can you? We took a
house in London for the first six months, and then I could tell that he missed Vixen Hill. Alan could walk away,
you see, but Roger couldn’t. And so we returned to Sussex.” Putting a hand to her head, she said, “I wish
“I must go—” Lydia said, hardly listening to me as she turned to look for her coat and hat. “I’ve stayed too
long as it is. I couldn’t bear to have anyone else see me now. Not looking like this.”
“He won’t come up,” I told her. “Mrs. Hennessey’s rules? Remember? She’ll inform me that he’s here. And
I’ll go down. You needn’t worry.”
“She’ll want to know who I am—why I’m here in your flat. I can’t blame her—this is her house. I’ll leave. It’s
best.”
“And where will you go then?”
She stopped in midstride, staring at me. “I—I don’t know.”
“Then stay here. I’ll hurry down and speak to Simon before Mrs. Hennessey comes to our door. Will that
be all right? There’s nothing to fear from him, by the way. He’s traveled here from Somerset, and he’ll want
to ask what my plans are.”
That seemed to reassure her. She dropped her headlong dash for her coat and hat, sitting down in the
nearest chair as if her limbs suddenly refused to hold her upright any longer. I could see that touch of
dizziness returning as she closed her eyes against it.
“You’re very kind. I don’t like to take advantage . . .” Her voice trailed away.
I went to the door, smiled at her, and then closed it behind me.
Simon was standing in the entry, a tall, handsome man with that air of confidence about him that had
always marked him and my father, the Colonel. My mother told me once when I was young that it was the
badge of command. Simon had served with my father, rising through the ranks to Regimental Sergeant-
Major, and leaving the Army when the Colonel Sahib, as my mother and I called him behind his back,
retired. He’d been a part of our lives since I could remember, and I trusted him implicitly. But how to explain
that to my nervous guest? It was better to leave it that he was a member of my family.
He greeted me and then said apologetically, “We only received your telegram early this morning. Or I’d
have met you at Victoria Station. Your mother has sent me to collect you. The Colonel is away.”
My father, though retired, was often summoned to give his opinion and offer his experience to the War
Office. As was Simon. I never knew what they did, nor did my mother, but they would sometimes leave
rather abruptly and return looking as if they hadn’t slept in days, telling us nothing about where they’d been
or why. I did know that my father had once been sent to Scotland for a week, because he brought my mother
a lovely brooch to make up for missing her birthday.
“Simon—” I glanced over my shoulder. “I’m so sorry. I can’t come with you just now. Let me walk with you
to the motorcar.”
He was used to my ways. He said, “Bess,” in that tone of voice I’d heard so many times.
“Not here,” I replied and stepped out into the raw, cold morning air. The rain had become a damp drizzle,
but the clouds were still dark enough to promise a downpour sooner rather than later. He took off his coat
and settled it around my shoulders.
I huddled gratefully into its warmth, and when we were out of hearing of the woman up in my flat, I said
quickly, “There was someone in the doorway last night, when I came home. A woman. She had nowhere to
go, and her face was badly bruised. I took her in, and she’s still upstairs, very frightened. I can’t leave
London until I’ve sorted out what brought her here last night. ”
“And her husband will come looking for her, mark my words,” he warned. “This is not a very good idea,
“Even if he does, he can’t have any idea where to begin. You see, she took a train to London and then just
walked aimlessly for hours. It’s a wonder she hasn’t made herself ill. She wasn’t dressed for the weather.” I
sighed. “What was I to do, Simon, leave her standing there in the cold wind? And what should I have done
this morning, let her walk out into that pelting rain, and consider myself well out of it? Even Mother would
agree I didn’t have a choice.”
“Your mother is as tenderhearted as you are. Yes, all right, I take your point. What is this woman’s name?
Where does she come from?”
“She hasn’t told me yet,” I admitted. “At the moment she’s trying to convince herself that she made a
mistake, leaving. She feels her husband is just as unhappy that this happened.”
“Men who take their own fury out on women always repent what was done. Until the next time.”
“Oddly enough, I’m beginning to think this isn’t the usual case. I think it may be true that Lydia was
shocked by the blow.”
“I thought you didn’t know her name.”
“Well, no, it’s her mother’s name. I told her I had to call her something.”
He took a deep breath. “Very well. If she decides to leave in the next few hours, we’ll drive Lydia to the
railway station and put her on the next train going in her direction. Will that do?”
“Simon, she has nowhere else to go. I can’t walk away, knowing that, and I can’t rush her into making a
decision that could be wrong. What’s more, I have a feeling she left in such a rush that she has little or no
money with her. And she doesn’t even have a change of clothing. For all intents and purposes, she’s
destitute.”
Simon had to agree with me, however reluctantly. But he reminded me, “It’s also possible her husband
keeps her deliberately short of money. All right, shall I take the two of you out to a restaurant? I’d like to form
my own opinion of your Lydia.”
“It’s very kind of you to suggest that, but I don’t believe she’ll want to be seen in public. She’s terribly
embarrassed by her appearance. The bruising really is quite stark. There’s no way to hide it with a little
powder.”
“Fair enough. I won’t choose a restaurant where she might be recognized. Tell her that.”
I wanted to look up at the window, to see if Lydia was watching us. But that would have given away the
fact that we were discussing her. “There’s one other thing.” I hesitated. “The police were searching for a
deserter last night. Not on this street, but still, it was just east of here. She thought her husband had sent
them to find her. This morning she’s afraid that her husband is going to appear before she’s prepared to
face him again. But what if that’s just wishful thinking on her part? What if Lydia’s husband doesn’t want her
to come back? For instance, there’s someone called Juliana who is involved.”
“My dear girl, you can’t fight her battles for her.”
“No, I understand that. But since I can’t abandon her, it may be necessary to take her to Somerset with me
until this is sorted out.”
“See if you can discover her true name, and I’ll find out what I can about her background. Meanwhile,
persuade her if you can to join us.”
I could tell that Simon was afraid I might have been led down the primrose path, that Lydia was lying to me
persuade her if you can to join us.”
I could tell that Simon was afraid I might have been led down the primrose path, that Lydia was lying to me
or taking advantage of my sympathy for her own ends.
The best way to prove him wrong was to do as he asked.
“I’ll try, I promise you.”
I handed Simon his coat and went back into the house. Mrs. Hennessey came out to greet me, asking
about France, and I told her that I was fortunate enough to have Christmas leave.
“How lovely for your mother and father,” she said. “Did I see Sergeant-Major Brandon pass my window
just now?”
“Yes, I came down to speak to him. I thought you might be resting.”
She nodded. Simon was quite her favorite, and had been since the summer when he’d all but saved her
life. And mine. She asked about my family, and about Somerset, and finally after telling me that she would
be happy to bring up anything I needed, she went back into her own flat.
I hurried up the stairs and found Lydia listening at the door. “I overheard. You’re expected in Somerset,”
she said. “And here I am, keeping you from leaving. I’ve trespassed long enough on your kindness.”
“As a matter of fact,” I told her, “Simon has come to take me out to dine. Would you like to go?
Somewhere you aren’t known, of course.” I added cheerfully, “It will be all right.”
“No, I couldn’t possibly consider it.”
“Well, it’s rather early, at that,” I said, sweeping aside her refusal. “I believe he has some business to see
to first, but he’ll come again at one o’clock. There’s time to reconsider.”
I hurried out the door, as if Simon was waiting for my answer. He was standing at the foot of the stairs,
and I asked him to collect me at one o’clock, and he reluctantly agreed.
“I may bring a friend along,” I said, for Lydia’s benefit. “Do you mind?”
“Not at all,” he answered, and then with a gleam in his eye that told me he was getting his own back, he
added, “Is it Diana? I’ve missed her.”
“I think she’s in Alexandria,” I told him, making a face.
Then I set about convincing Lydia that she would be safe with us.
It was an uphill struggle. She wavered between worrying that she had already been away too long, that
Roger might believe she wasn’t coming back, and the certainty that all would be well once she could see
him face-to-face and tell him she’d been wrong.
Watching that inner battle, I was well aware that it wasn’t wise to pry. But I was beginning to think that
knowing who Juliana was might help me understand why Lydia had fled to London. She couldn’t have known
how badly her face would be bruised. She must have needed to put distance between her and something—
or someone. And where were the other members of her family—or Roger’s—to let her go without making
certain she was properly clothed and had the money to support herself for a few days?
I waited for an opening to ask questions, but it was clear that she wasn’t ready to talk to me or anyone
else.
In the end I don’t think it was my persuasion that convinced Lydia to let Simon take us to lunch as much as
it was her own need to escape from the torment in her head. All the same, she went down the stairs warily,
as if she expected this to be a trap. I wouldn’t have been surprised if she’d suddenly



