28 



be best to go into trance near to your normal bed time. Perhaps use an early 
morning slot for some other goal on your list. 

RULE FOUR:


Set a time limit. As I said when trying to achieve a fast recovery from 
an illness or a broken arm it is a good idea to give your subconscious a time 
limit to work to. If you like you are being more specific which as we know is 
what the subconscious likes. Give it clear quantifiable instructions. 

As I have already said try to be realistic when setting your time limit. 
Don’t expect to play Brahms Second Piano Concerto in one months time if 
you have only had a couple of lessons and just mastered chop sticks! 
However if you programmed your mind to do exactly as your teacher tells you 
and imagine you are an accomplished player you will be truly surprised at 
your rate of progress. By simply programming your mind to be more alert and 
retain more information your ability in many area can drastically improve. 
Remember your subconscious mind can process more than two million bits of 
information every second and it never forgets anything! 

Similarly don’t ask your subconscious to make you a millionaire in two 
weeks if you are currently earning about two hundred pounds each week. 
However you don’t want to underestimate your abilities. I want to go into this 
in more detail at a later date but I hope you can get the general idea. Basically 

set yourself a realistic time limit for your goal and you will reach it long before 
the time limit you have set has expired. 

RULE FIVE:


When phrasing your suggestions use clear simple language. You have 

to speak to your subconscious as though it is a clever nine or ten year old 
child. You are not trying to win some English literature prize or redrafting the 
law of contract. Use clear simple words that say exactly what it is you want! 

RULE SIX: 

Use exaggerating and emotional words. As you already know the 

subconscious is were your emotional feelings are kept and so you will have 

greater success if you appeal to your emotions. Use words like:


29 



Wonderful, 
Beautiful, 
Joyous, 
Exiting, 
Tremendous, 
Generous, 
Blissful, 
Love, 
Sexy, 
Brilliant, 


I am sure you get the picture. The more you say or think these words 
or words like them, with real feeling the greater the impact you will have on 
your subconscious. 

RULE SEVEN:


Make sure you repeat the goal often in your suggestion. Rephrase it 

many times by using different words and feelings. Use the emotive words 
above. Be descriptive and make your affirmation as attractive to you as you 
can. Enlarge upon it. Approach it from different angles and in different ways. 

The more often you are exposed to the idea you are going to implant 
the more firmly entrenched it will become in your mind. 

If you want to stop biting your nails it may take a little time before your 
subconscious replaces the thought patterns that cause you to bit your nails. 
The more often you replace the instructions to bite your nails with new ones 
the more likely your subconscious mind will respond e.g.:- “ Because I like 
beautifully shaped long and strong nails I always take great care of them. My 
nails grow tremendously strong and look wonderful. They are fantastic “ 

RULE EIGHT:


Always suggest that you are actually able to do something and not that you 

you have the ability to do something. You would not say “I have the ability to 
play squash like a professional.” You might phrase it as follows:-‘I Play 
squash like a professional”. Not “I have the ability to sleep all through the 

30 


night” but rather ‘I sleep soundly all through the night”. Simply stating the 
ability to do something distances the action in some way and weakens the 
affirmation. 

Before I give you an example of script for a possible induction lets 
summarise the rules:


Rule One:Be 
as positive as possible. 
Rule Two:Use 
the present tense. 
Rule Three:Be 
specific in your affirmations. 
Rule Four:Give 
your subconscious a time limit to work to. 
Rule Five:Use 
clear simple language. 
Rule Six:Use 
strongly emotive words in your suggestion. 
Rule Seven:Repeat 
the goal as often and in many different ways 
as possible. 
Rule Eight:Suggest 
you can/are doing something. Not just the 
ability to do it. 

What follows is an example of a possible script to help someone lose 
weight. Read it through and see how it follows the rules set out earlier. If you 
have a tape recorder you could record yourself reading the script and play it 
back after a suitable time has elapsed so that you can go into trance before 
the script starts. If you recorded some suitably soothing music for about ten 
minutes or so and then softly bring in the script. You should find the message 
will get through to the subconscious. Or simply record the induction technique 
from part one, leave a small pause and then move onto the suggestion after 
that. 

If you are lucky enough to have a Multi-Tracking System you will be 
able to keep the soothing music in the background and superimpose your 
voice over it and adjust recording levels accordingly. You may have some 
recordings of music you could use but I will give you a few suggestions. The 
following recordings have been found to work fairly well. 

1. Second movement “Andante” from Concerto for two Pianos and orchestra 
in E flat major K365 by Mozart. 
2. The “Adagio” from Albinoni’s 
31 


3. The “Romanze Larghetto” from Frederic Chopin’s Concerto for Piano and 
orchestra in E minor No 1. 
4. The “Adagio assai” from Maurice’s Concerto for Piano and Orchestra in G 
major. 
5. The slow movement from Mozart’s Concerto for Piano in A major K488 
6. The slow movement from Handel’s Concerti Grossi op 3 number 1. 
Don’t worry if you don’t have these recordings in your collection 
because your friendly local library will be able to help. The following 
recordings are only a suggestion you can use what you want really but 
remember what it is you are trying to achieve here. Obviously some Heavy 
Metal Band going at full pelt may not bring you to the desired relaxed state 
you are seeking. For the same reason the music should be kept very much in 
the background and not too loud. You can isolate a few minutes of a work and 
loop it round again and repeat it as often as you wish. I know it is not a very 
musical thing to do but it does work quiet well, it almost takes on the function 
of a Mantra in meditation. 

WEIGHT LOSS: 


I have heard it said that “many live on one-third of the food they eat 
and Doctors and diet organisations live on the other two-thirds”. Most 
slimmers know that dieting nearly always brings about overeating. Weight 
goes down initially but soon shoots up again. The idea of living a life of 
deprivation and self denial is very difficult to accept for many people. 

Obesity can be a very difficult condition to cure as you can see from 
the numerous magazines available offering a multitude of diets and theories. 
Lets face it dieting is very big business. If it could be solved easily then 

32 


nobody would have a problem. 

Often the seeds of the problem of overeating can start at a very early 
age. As we grow up there are all sorts of messages programmed into the 
subconscious in connection with eating. When food is left on the plate you are 
told not to waste it. You are told that you must have three square meals a 
day. When a child cries because it has hurt itself the parents will often stick a 
sweet into its mouth as a comforter. Such messages over time will 
programme your mind to eat because you feel unhappy or because you are ill 
or for many other reasons but not because you are actually hungry and need 
the food as a source of energy and sustenance. 

Eat what you want and loose weight! 

Yeah I know you have heard it all before but with the use of Hypnosis 
you can achieve a healthy normal weight and maintain it while eating as much 
as you want. The crucial difference is that you educate your subconscious 
mind so that you only eat what your body actually needs. In other words when 
you are physiologically hungry and not when you are psychologically hungry. 
You only want to eat what your body needs to function and remain healthy. 

Your first step in achieving this is to choose the ideal weight that suits 
you. That is to say the weight that suits your bone structure and height. Look 
in a mirror and see yourself in your imagination at your knew ideal weight. 
Don’t worry if you find it difficult to imagine yourself in this way. Some people 
who have been over weight for a long time can have a little trouble at first 
however trust me you can do it. Perhaps get a picture of someone from a 
magazine who’s figure you admire and see yourself as that shape. Perhaps 
superimpose your face onto the body either in your imagination or use a 
photograph of yourself. 

The important thing to remember is that your body will take that shape. 
What your subconscious mind believes and expects Will Happen!! 

Now as you have already been told Hypnosis cannot make you do 
what you don’t really want so look at yourself in the mirror and decide whether 
what you see is what you like or do you want to really change. What follows is 
an affirmation for achieving the superb figure of your choice. This would 
normally be read out once you are in a suitable trance state as described in 
part one. 

If you are using a tape recorder the induction should be given in a slow 
soft monotone as said in part one. The suggestion ought to be delivered in a 
clear businesslike tone. And when you come to the awakening section read it 
out a bit louder and more forcefully. Take care not to make your changes in 
timbre from induction to suggestion too abrupt otherwise you will startle 
yourself out of trance. 

33 


Affirmation for achieving the superb figure of your choice:


Now do know and do trust that you will immediately awaken totally 
alert and in normal consciousness should there be an emergency that needs 
your attention. 

You always readily accept the suggestions given while in Hypnosis 
and reach a perfect balance between the conscious and subconscious mind. 
Each time you go into trance you find it easier and easier 

Now, as you drift deeper into that beautiful feeling of deep relaxation 
you know it is your birth right to have a perfectly shaped body and of an ideal 
size. 

You know your body to be a truly remarkable creation and you have 
such a tremendous respect for it You know what your chosen weight and size 
is for your own body and you constantly see yourself in your mind’s eye at this 
weight and size. Your subconscious mind has a tremendous desire to see you 
looking and weighing and maintaining your perfect size and weight. 

Now, relax and let go with each breath you take and go deeper deeper— 
deeeper Imagine you are standing alone in a large airy room. The 
room is known only to you as it is a secret place where you come to relax in 
peace and enjoy being and feeling slim and beautifully attractive——to love 
being the real you with your perfect figure. 

Now see your room as furnished in wonderful colours. And notice one 
wall is covered with a large immaculate mirror Beautiful sunlight is filling the 
room and the mirror is radiating this fight and shows the beauty of your room 
and also reflects your beauty. You feel wonderful As you take gentle breaths 
you smell the fresh clean air fill your lungs and you feel so happy. You know 
that you are always your ideal size and weight when you are in this room and 
you come here often to relax and feel happy. You feel great admiring your 
terrific figure in the mirror. You turn from one side to the other enjoying the 
beautiful attractive person that is you. Now you see a comfortable chair or 
couch, and go and sit down. It is incredibly comfortable and your body sinks 
back into the soft cushions. As you relax even more you feel absolutely 
fantastic mentally, physically, and emotionally. You love feeling so healthy 
slim, and beautiful You are feeling so good and wonder why you haven’t done 
this before. 

You know you deserve to feel so good and have the best in life. You 
always do good things for yourself You love yourself and respect your body 
You are loving your new positive attitude to life. You know that your great 
respect and love of your body is because of your new eating habits. 

34 


You enjoy sitting down when eating, and at your regular mealtimes you 
love to sit down and have much greater pleasure eating than at any previous 
time. You like to really savour the taste of the food. You like to take time to 
taste each mouthful to give your taste buds time to enjoy each bite fully. For 
this reason you put your knife and fork or spoon down between each mouthful 
to give yourself enough time to really taste the food. When eating with your 
fingers you put the item of food down on the plate or onto a napkin until you 
have finished each mouthful. 

You only think of what you are eating at that time, you only concentrate 
on one bite at a time. You enjoy to feel the texture of and nature of the food. 
You REALLY feel it in your mouth. You find it is the taste of the food that is 
more important than the food itself or the quantity you are eating. As you 
savour each mouthful it tastes so-oo good 

Finally when you have enjoyed your mouthful to the full you eventually 
swallow it is only then that you think about taking another bite. Of course you 
are not in a hurry so you can take your time. When you decide to take another 
bite you savour it even more than your first bite. You enjoy it even more than 
the first and it is only when you have enjoyed your second bite do you go on 
to your third. And in this way you repeat the process after each tasty bite 
enjoying each one the utmost. 

The sensory centres in your mouth are very grateful you have taken 
time to really taste each bite fully. And your stomach is grateful you have 
allowed it to deal with the food slowly and in its own time. It hates that awful 
feeling of being stuffed like at Christmas time. Your body thanks and loves 
you because it knows you are letting it become healthy, beautiful energetic 
and happy. 

35 


You always leave some food on your plate. This is because you only 
eat what your body needs to function. And as you leave some food on your 
plate you know you do so because you don’t want it. The food is no longer 
required and so can be thrown away into the dustbin. It will not harm the 
dustbin but will harm your body if you eat something it does not need. After all 
you are not a dustbin. You care for your body and eat good healthy food 
which is full of nutrients and rich in vitamins. You enjoy fresh salads and low 
fat foods. You always drink plenty of fresh water during your meal time. Your 
take several sips between each bit of food. You feel wonderfully alive and 
healthy with these new eating habits. 

Whenever you think of eating food when your body does not 
need it you know you can simply and easily deal with this. You simply relax 
yourself, take a dee-eep breath, hold it, and slowly count to ten. Then you 
close your eyes -exhale -and think the words relax -re-e-lax. With these 
words your body relaxes all over and you drift effortlessly into dee-eep re-eaxation. 
Every muscle, every ligament every nerve in your body is going limp 
and lazy. 

Now you can go into your secret room if only for a few seconds and 
see your beautiful, stunningly attractive figure in your mirror. Now open your 
eyes and think whether you want to eat now or would you prefer to wait until 
your meal time when you know you will enjoy the taste much better You know 
you will enjoy it all the more later because you will have saved up your 
appetite. 

Your subconscious mind knows very well the difference between real 
hunger when your body needs food for energy and the stupid desire to eat for 
some other idiotic reason. Boredom is not hunger nor is worry, neither is 
disappointment or frustration. These things are nothing to do with eating or 
feeling hungry. 

Your subconscious mind is far to clever to allow you to eat for any of 
these false reasons. Only fools and idiots do this and you know you are not an 
idiot You can tell when something displeases you or stresses you and you feel 
a fool’s appetite coming. You know you can close your eyes and take a long 
dee-ep breath, hold it for ten seconds, and just think the words re-eelax. You 
go into your secret room even if only for an instant and you feel absolutely 
wonderful You are a beautiful, stunningly attractive, perfectly shaped, human 
being. You are marvellous. 

You know the only time you feel hungry is when your body tells you it 
need nourishment This is good and natural Eating for any other reason is 
simply harming your body and because you understand this you only eat 
when your body needs the food in order to function properly. Just like a car 
that needs petrol to go. You only eat when you are physiologically hungry. 

36 


Now go back to your secret room and take another long look at your 
beautiful figure. This is the real you. You love this real you. And you see and 
feel yourself becoming this person this shape more and more each and every 
day. You feel very happy because you know That people can see how good 
you look. You give out such positive vibes to people around you because you 
feel so wonderfully good. You feel tremendous because you have complete 
control of your mind and body You are the boss. 

Now relax, relax and go deeper so that these truly beneficial ideas can 
filter deeper and deeper into your subconscious mind for ever to guide you to 
your true self. Reelax----. 

(Leave a few minutes blank on the tape or have some peaceful music playing in the 
background while your mind can attune itself to these ideas and then go on to the wake 
up section that now follows. Remember to use a gradually more positive and alert tone 
of voice when using the wake up routine.) 

Now it is time to return to normal consciousness. You feel so 
wonderfully rested. I will now count from one to five, and as I do so, you will 
feel energy start to build and pulsate through your body You are wide awake 
as I count Five. One you are waking up now, as you awaken you feels more 
and more energetic and alive and good. Two you feel more awake, you feel 
totally fresh and sprightly from head to toe. really terrific. Three you feel as 
though you have splashed your face with cold beautiful Crystal clear running 
water and you feel so refreshed. Four you feel really good, calm and relaxed 
and at peace with nature. Five eyes open now! Wide awake. Take a deep 
deep breath and stretch and feel so really good. 

37 



WARNING!! 


Before we go any further I want to discuss some aspects of “Curative 
Hypnotherapy” and go through some case studies to illustrate its 
importance. 

I chose to write out a possible Hypnotic script to help weight loss 
because many people seek help in this area. The problem is many clients 
come with the expressed desire to lose weight and consciously believe that 
their only problem is simply that they eat too much. They do not know nor 
have they given any thought as to why they are eating too much. 

You might think who cares just treat the symptoms and get on with it. 

There are some so called therapists who take this attitude, probably 
through ignorance, and they seldom do their clients any good at all in fact 
they can do them harm. Please don’t miss understand me. This does NOT 
mean that hypnotherapy causes them harm. 

In many cases whether it be obesity, alcoholism, a stammer, fear of 
flying, fear of driving, fear of men, fear of women, fear of enclosed spaces, 
fear of open spaces, or whatever, there will often be a hidden reason buried 
in the subconscious which pushes a person to react in away which would 
appear to be detrimental to themselves. 

As I have already said when the conscious mind holds one view and 
the subconscious another the subconscious always wins. It is for this reason 
the alcoholic may consciously wish to stop drinking because he knows his 
family are turning away from him in disgust, he will soon lose his job, and he 
is rapidly heading for cirrhosis of the liver, but he just cannot seem to stop 
himself from heading for self destruction. Hypnosis can treat symptoms very 
effectively indeed but unless the cause of the symptoms are removed or 
neutralised the problem will almost certainly come back or some other far 
worse symptom may replace it instead. 

In such cases people have accepted there is a problem consciously 
but the subconscious mind is reacting to other outdated or erroneous 
information on which to justify its actions. This is in effect bad programming 
from the past. 

38 


I could tell you about many cases which have been successfully 
treated with hypnosis. The following examples may give you some idea as to 
the power of the subconscious mind and how, if it is not checked, it can cause 
great anguish, unhappiness, and harm to many individuals. 

One example of this was the case of a lady who had been married for 
nearly ten years but had not been able to have a baby. Apparently her 
fallopian tubes were always blocked and so her eggs could never travel into 
the womb to be fertilised. Finally she had surgery whereupon she was only 
left with one tube remaining. This tube seemed to inexplicably block up. 

Under Hypnosis it transpired that her subconscious mind was 
punishing her because at the age of sixteen she became pregnant and her 
parents made her have an abortion. She never wanted the abortion but was 
forced into it. She felt like she had committed murder. 

Because she considered herself a murderer her subconscious mind 
wanted to protect her from making the same mistake again or punish her and 
prevent her from committing the same crime. It may seem bizarre but this is 
how the subconscious mind can work. By the use of regression under 
hypnosis she was able to relive her past and rationalise what had happened. 
This enabled her to reprogram her subconscious mind and stop it from 
interfering in her attempts to have a baby. At last she had stopped punishing 
herself! Last I heard, she had a boy aged four and little girl about eighteen 
months. 

Regression is a vital tool to a Hypnotherapist without which it would not 
be possible to cure the many thousands of people who turn to Hypnotherapy 
for a solution to their problem. Sadly for many it is nearly always the option of 
last resort. 

Because the subconscious mind never forgets anything that has 
occurred in your life there is a vast data bank full of information from your past 
stored there waiting to be accessed. The conscious mind cannot keep all this 
information on hand and so has had to forget most of it out of necessity. 
Under Hypnosis it is possible to go back to your earliest recollections and 
remember once again what occurred all those years ago. This is what is 
called Regression. 

39 



The reason Regression is so important to a Hypnotist is that often it is 
an old memory of an event that has been misinterpreted by the subconscious 
that is the cause of a problem. The conscious mind will have forgotten all 
about it years ago but the subconscious mind still holds it close by. 

All professional Hypnotists have a lot of people coming to them in 
order to lose weight. It is by no means rare that there is often a deeper 
psychological reason for that person’s obesity. 

In one case a girl of twenty eight called Mary had become very 
overweight, as it turned out, owing to an incident that had occurred when she 
was only seven years old. One meal time her younger sister pushed her plate 
full of food on to the floor however nobody realised that this action was due to 
her having a fit and she was to die from a brain tumour six months later. 

For some reason Mary’s subconscious had associated her sister’s 
death with her earlier action of pushing her meal onto the floor. Naturally 
enough she didn’t want that kind of thing happening to her, she didn’t want to 
be punished, to die, for wasting her food so she had developed a compulsion 
to eat 

Obviously had she been aware of the real reason for her sister’s 
actions and that it was her illness which made her involuntarily push her plate 
onto the floor she would not have developed this unnatural desire to eat. 
Under Hypnosis it was possible for her to review events with an adult attitude 
and understand that she did not have to eat every scrap of food available. 

I know it can sound illogical that the subconscious mind is capable of 
constructing such an idea but it does happen time and time again. The 
subconscious mind is not logical and has no commonness. Under Hypnosis it 
is possible to go back to the original piece of programming which led to a 
problem. Like any computer if you put bad or erroneous information in you will 
get a lot of nonsense out the other end. Perhaps the next example will give 
you a better idea. 

Clare had turned to Hypnosis because she was very concerned why 
her weight had so dramatically increased soon after she had had her baby 
son. Her weight had gone from an attractive 1251b to 2571b and despite 
going (9 the doctor nothing that was tried seemed to help. 

40 


Apparently tests showed that there was a hormone imbalance but the 
treatment she was given was not successful in reducing her weight. Her 
marriage was suffering because her husband did not like to see his wife 
putting on so much weight and so their sex life was suffering accordingly. 

Eventually her doctor had suggested she try Hypnosis in case there 
was some deeper reason for her condition. After a few sessions it transpired 
that the cause of her overeating was connected to her having a baby. 

Clare’s mother had died soon after she had given birth to her son and 
for some reason this had triggered her desire to overeat. After a some more 
sessions it became clear Clare had associated having a baby with the cause 
of her mother’s death. On digging deeper there was a connection with 
someone mentioning the old saying “as one comes into the world another 
goes out”. 

Finally after more digging the reason for Clare’s problem became 
clearer. When Clare knew she was pregnant she broke the news to her 
mother who responded with “What you’re pregnant. Oh Clare you will be the 
death of me!” Shortly after the baby was born Clare’s mother died of a stroke. 

The shock of her mothers death led her logical subconscious mind to 
assume that the act of Clare having a baby had led directly to her mother’s 
death. The subconscious mind knew that in to have a baby you have to have 
sex. It also thought that if Clare were to have another baby someone else may 
die, possibly her father this time! 

It went on to reason that if Clare was to have sex with her husband 
there was a chance that she might get pregnant again. Her subconscious 
mind knew that contraception was not 100% effective, especially when there 
was a life at stake, so it logically had to ensure that Clare did not have sex 
with her husband. Since her husband did not like fat overweight women it 
seemed logical that if Glare became fat and unattractive they would be much 
less likely to have sex.Q.E.D. 

Now this was quiet a complex problem and it took many sessions to get 
to the bottom of it. If she were simply Hypnotised and given basic instructions 
to eat less she would probably have lost weight however because the 

underlying problem would not have been dealt with. Her subconscious mind 

would have fought back and ensured that she would put the weight back on 

41 


again or alternatively found some other, more drastic way to prevent her from 
having sex. 

The reason I mention these examples is to point out that it is very 
important to find out the real reason for a problem and not just treat the 
symptoms. You have to deal with the cause as well! 

Some Hypnotherapists don’t bother to find out the real reason behind a 
problem and so cause more problems for their clients. They simply swap one 
set of symptoms with worse ones. If you think there might be a deeper reason 
for some difficulty your having you should consult a Curative Hypnothe 
rapist 

Ask them how they would go about treating you and whether they 
would use regression to get to the root of your problem. 

I am not trying to scare you I just want you to know what options are 
open to you. I don’t want you to try Hypnotherapy and dismiss it out of hand 
without giving it proper chance. 

You might like to know that Clare steadily lost weight without having to 
diet she was able to eat what she wanted. She eventually returned to her 
normal weight shedding around 1301b. 

I cannot stress often or hard enough that if you have a 
medical condition you must get yourself checked out by a 
doctor. Get a competent diagnosis first. For example if you 
are in constant pain and do not know why go to a doctor 
before using Hypnosis to numb the pain. Pain is nature’s 
warning signal that something is not right. If you break your 
arm you would not just use Hypnosis to kill the pain. You 
would go to hospital and have it put in plaster. (End of 
Sermon!) 

How To Find Out What You Really Want 
from Life. 

42 


I will assume for the sake of argument that you do not have any 
pressing or urgent health problems that you need to be resolved. I would like 
you to write down on a piece of paper your answers to the following 
questions. If you don’t think you have enough time to do it properly leave it 
until later when you do have the time. It only takes a few minutes but does 
require careful thought and consideration. 

1. What five things do you value most in your life? What five things would 
you strive for or make sacrifices for? 
a)………………………………………………………………………………. 
b)………………………………………………………………………………. 
c)………………………………………………………………………………. 

. 

e)………………………………………………………………………………. 

f)……………………………………………………………………………….. 

2. In no more than thirty (30) seconds write down the three most important 
goals in your life right now? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 

3. What would you do if you won £1,000,000 tomorrow? What things would 
you buy? What debts would you pay off? What places would you travel to? 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 

43 


4. What would you do if you had no mental or physical limitations placed on 
you. By this I don’t mean would you fly like a bird or would you like to turn into 
a horse and win the Grand National! What I mean is what do you dream of 
doing or aspire to do but thus far have been afraid to try? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 

5. What would you do if you were told you only had six months to live? That 
is to say if you had six months to live in perfect health what you do, what 
would you change, how would you spend your time? 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 

6. What have you always wanted to do but never had the opportunity, money, 
or courage to try? What have you held back from trying? 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 

7. What things or actions on your part give you the greatest feeling of self 
worth, recognition, or importance. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
……………………………………………………………………………. 

8. Imagine you have just found an old bottle on the beach and you uncork it 
and a Genie rushed out granting you just one wish? What one thing would 
you ask for if anything could be granted. (Don’t write down you would wish to 
be twelve again or swept back to the time of Henry the eight. Don’t limit 
yourself but use a little common-sense too.) What one thing would you do 
what one ambition would you realise if you knew you could not fail? 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

…………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

44 


When you have written you answers down I want you to put the paper 
in a safe place because we will come back to it later. lf you change your mind 
to any of the questions just write them down on another piece of paper. Don’t 
change the original answers just yet! 

What we are trying to do here is find out what makes you tick. What 
motivates you. What things do you want out of life. What are your real drives 
and ambition. Unless we find out what it is you are truly and genuinely after it 
is harder, not impossible but harder, to programme your subconscious to go 
out and get them. 

The clearer the idea or image you have of what it is you want from life 
the closer you are to achieving your goal. It sounds simple but it is perfectly 
true. The journey of a thousand miles begins with but one step. The crucial 
point is that we keep going forwards and not to the side or, God forbid, 
backwards. With a clear plan or good map we know we will get there and 
probably a lot sooner than you ever dreamed possible! 

In Part Four I will tell you how you can turn the 
power of your subconscious to thrust you in the 
direction of achieving your life’s dreams and 
ambitions. 

It’s a fascinating business. In the meantime listento the tape provided with this months release and 
practise going into trance as often as you can. 

45 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind!! 


Part Three 
Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 



PART THREE 


“Things are neither good nor bad but thinking makes them so” 
SHAKESPEARE, Hamlet. 

This release will probably be the most fascinating part of the 
programme so far. It is now time for you to learn how to take control of your 
life and steer it around in the direction you really want it to go. Some of the 
techniques you will learn here are so powerful that you will not believe the 
incredible progress you will make towards your life’s dreams. 

“You are about to get everything you want out of 
life” 

Now I know that some of you will think that it all sounds too good to be 
true, pie in the sky stuff. You may even think that you have heard all this 
before. It’s all that self improvement rubbish again. I tried all that before it’s no 
good. This is not an unnatural reaction after all it can sound too good to be 
true or even impossible if you are not familiar with the workings and power of 
the mind. 

However it is true and many thousands people have already used 
some of the techniques mentioned in this course to get all they want out of life. 
The strange thing is that the process is very simple. In fact it is deceptively 
simple and this is often what makes people sceptical. 

Don’t worry about how it works just accept that it does, I know because 
I have used it as have thousands of others. As someone once said “some 
people spend their time studying the roots while others pick the fruit, which 
end do we want to be on? 

If you can suspend your scepticism for a shod while and give yourself a 
fair chance you won’t be sorry I promise. After all you owe it to yourself. 

There are a great many books written on self improvement and goal 
setting. Some are very good many are appalling and have been cobbled 
together by quick “buck” merchants who only have the vaguest notion of what 
they are talking about, let alone tried the techniques they attempt to describe. 

I decided to include this section in a course on Hypnotism because a 

47 


great many of the techniques described in books on self improvement are 
firmly based on and use Hypnotism. 

You would be amazed at the weird and wonderful names people, 
mostly Americans, can come up with to describe what is undoubtedly a great 
force within us all. Things like “Dyna/Psyc” or “Neo/Psyc” etc. 

I can only assume authors think that were they to use the word 
Hypnotism it would frighten people off, perhaps for the reasons I gave you in 
part one. 

Of course just using Hypnotism on its own will achieve great results but 
when you combine it with some other brilliant techniques the results are quiet 
amazing. 

As you know throughout this course you have been learning about the 
characteristics of your subconscious mind. Well you will not be surprised to 
learn that it the vital link in all of us which determines whether we fail in 
achieving our life’s dreams or whether we succeed. 

Now this point is so vitally important that I want you to really take 
note! The subconscious mind is the vital link which determines whether 
we fail in achieving our life’s dreams or whether we succeed. 

When we understand this basic truth we can start to plan for the future 
with confidence. You have already read some case histories in part two which 
clearly illustrate the kind of harm the subconscious can inflict if it is allowed to 
go unchecked. The subconscious can in the same way either help or hinder us 
in our desires to improve our lot in life. 

The first step in achieving everything we want out of life is to ensure 
and convince our subconscious mind that we deserve to succeed. It doesn’t 
matter a fig if our conscious mind knows we are extremely capable or more 
talented or cleverer than the next person, if our subconscious mind has a 
contrary view or idea then we are in trouble. If your subconscious mind and 
your conscious mind are working to different agendas then you will fail. It is as 
simple as that 

The significance of the above statement is so important 
to your success in life that I want to drive it home.I believe it is 
because this point is not explained fully in some self help 
books that some people fail despite their obvious conscious 
eagerness to succeed. 

48 


We have to convince the subconscious mind that 
we are worth and deserve to have everything we want 
out of life. Remember what your subconscious mind 
believes and expects will happen. 

This may sound simple but it is nevertheless perfectly true. The esteem 
with which our subconscious considers us can be described as our “Self 
Image”. We all have a self image which is in some degree is either “Positive” 
or “Negative”. It should always be your aim to build up our self image as much 
as possible so that you have a strong “Positive Self Image”. 

This is a vital ingredient for any individual if they are going to enjoy a 
happy and enjoyable life. How much you like yourself is the single most 
important statement about you as a human being! How much you like yourself 
determines how well you perform in every area of your life. How much you like 
yourself is the very core of your personality. Many studies have been carried 
out on this subject over many many years. It has been found that there is a 
direct relationship between how much a person likes himself and how 
successful that person is in forming relationships with others. The more you 
like yourself the better you perform in your career and in every area in your 
life. 

It is a strange thing but nature gives all of us a large helping of “Positive 
self Image” or PSI when we start out in life. A baby in its mother’s womb feels 
warm and secure. It has no knowledge of the outside world, its pleasures or its 
dangers. Once you are born you are exposed to all sorts of influences some of 
which enforce your PSI and others which detract from it giving you a “Negative 
Self Image” or NSI, (sometimes described as “Inadequate self image or ISI). 

Doctor Eric Berne MD termed these influences in life as “Strokes” and it 
is the balance of these positive and negative strokes in our life which is 
responsible for our current level of PSI or NSI. Another important aspect to 
note is that we are far more vulnerable or impressionable when we are young 
than when we get older. To quote the old Jesuit saying “give me a boy at a 
tender age and he will be mine for life”. Young minds are more malleable at an 
early age say seven than at twelve, and more suggestible at twelve than at 
eighteen. It is for this reason that most Self Images are really formed in our 
early, or formative, years. 

Bad strokes can take the form of negative criticisms particularly at an 
early age. A small child being constantly criticised about having their room in a 
mess will ultimately grow up to be a messy individual. After all if a small child 
is constantly told they are messy and sloppy they will come to believe it and 
act accordingly. 

49 


Particularly difficult “bad strokes” can and often do occur when a child 
feels it is unloved by its parents. Perhaps they don’t spend enough time with 
the child because they have busy lives demanding careers or whatever. Many 
delinquent children suffer because deep down they feel unwanted by their 
parents. Sometimes parents will actually say to their children that they are 
nothing but trouble, they wish they never had them, or “if I didn’t have you I 
could have made something of my life” etc. 

One of the worst things a parent can do to a child is to withhold their 
love. To a small child this kind of treatment can be devastating 
psychologically. 

It is not possible to give a newly born baby too much love and attention. 
It is thought that the first year is crucial. In several experiments that took place 
at the beginning of this century, and some in the early forties, a number of 
newly born baby orphans were divided into two groups. The first group were 
looked after, talked to, cooed over, and cuddled. The second group were just 
fed and had their nappies changed. They were deprived of any real normal 
human contact other than their basic needs. They were given no emotional 
support at all. Unfortunately this experiment was not stopped in time with 
disastrous results. 

After a short time the first group seemed to thrive however it became 
very clear that the second group began to suffer and appeared to wither away. 
Incredibly over ninety percent of the babies in the second group actually 
shrivelled up and died within the first ninety days of birth! Horrific but true. 

Most babies will neither receive constant loving attention nor habitual 
neglect or abuse. Of course there will be exceptions but in the main they will 
receive a number of negative strokes and a number of positive strokes. It is 
hoped that you have received more positive strokes negative ones. 

It is well known among most psychiatrists treating patients with eating 
disorders like anorexia that they have to give these people unconditional love. 
This is because these people have virtually no self esteem at all. Their PSI is 
at zero. 

Now at this point I want you to realise that a person’s level of PSI does 
not necessarily have a direct relationship to their physical or mental 
capabilities. It is perfectly possible, indeed it is fairly common, to find people 
with very low PSI’s or strong NSI’s who appear to be incredibly talented or 
skilled at their work or at a particular hobby. 

50 


This statement may seem contradictory but it nonetheless perfectly 
true. I have had a friend who is a good example of someone who is extremely 
capable, very talented, and highly intelligent, but who has an extremely poor 
PSI. I will call her Karen although it is not her real name. I remember her 
taking four A levels and she passed them with straight A grades. I swear she 
only revised for the exams the night before. She never seemed to work hard 
on her homework because she did it all at school. In fact she said she had to 
because she needed her time at home to practise the piano. Music was her 
first love although the school wanted her to try for Oxford and study English. 

Eventually it was time for her to audition for a place at one of the 
prestigious music colleges in the country. She auditioned for the Royal 
Northern College of Music, the Royal College of Music, the Royal Academy of 
Music, plus a few other places that I will not bother to mention. 

Of course she was awarded places at all of the music colleges she 
tried for. She could take her pick and she did. 

Now here is a person who had great academic ability and considerable 
talent in the arts. Incidentally I forgot to mention that she was a stunningly 
beautiful girl as well. 

Now you would think that a person like this would have the world at her 
feet. She had the ability to develop considerable skill in virtually any subject 
she decided to look at. In fact it was an in joke that give Karen a book on brain 
surgery in the morning and she would be in the operating theatre by the 
afternoon. Coupled with all these sickening talents she was also a great 
linguist! 

You might be surprised to learn that Karen was riddled with self doubt 
and insecurity. Her PSI was almost zero. She was desperately unsure of 
herself and was riddled with doubts about her own worthiness. To find the 
cause of lack of self worth you have to look closely at the family background. 

Karen’s parents were about the most ill matched couple you could 
imagine. Her father was a good twenty five years older than her mother. The 
mother married when she was only nineteen (in fact there is some doubt as to 
whether they ever did actually get married). The father was born in the 1920’s 
in Sicily. He had been married before but the marriage had failed. He was a 
simple person who never had any real formal education. Nobody did in those 
days since Sicily was a very poor island. He was born into a large family and 
his life was tough but he had a happy childhood all the same. His family were 
very close and there was a lot of love going around. He was basically a nice 
ordinary bloke with a warm friendly character. 

51 


The mother was a very different kind of person altogether. The story 
goes that she was an only child and was never really wanted in the first place. 
She was not shown any real love at home and was always made to feel 
worthless and a nuisance. Although bright at school she was not allowed to go 
on and take any worthwhile qualifications. As soon as she was old enough she 
was sent out to get a job. 

She got a job at a psychiatric ward in a hospital where she met her 
future husband. It was probably her first real encounter with the opposite sex. 
She was emotionally a very needy person. 

She was young and inexperienced and he appeared worldly wise and 
charming. Anyway they soon got together and before long she left her parents 
home to live with him. With hind sight one could say she took the first 
opportunity she got to get away from her parents. She craved a little love and 
affection and so when it was offered she grabbed it with both hands. 

When she was only just nineteen she gave birth to Karen. Karen’s 
mother soon felt very frustrated. As I have already said she was bright and 
could have made something of her life but she now had a young daughter to 
bring up. Her relationship with her husband became strained with numerous 
rows which often resulted in him walking out for a few days until things had 
simmered down. Karen’s mother knew she had a small child to bring up and 
didn’t like the idea of doing it on her own so she put up with the relationship as 
it was. At least this was how she saw it. She had begun what was soon to 
become her life long role in life that of playing the Martyr 

The mother had a very low PSI and ensured that her daughter would 
also. 

She wanted her child to have the opportunities she never had but at the 
same time she bitterly resented her daughter. She was jealous of her. Karen’s 
father doted on the girl and this reminded Karen’s mother of what she had 
craved for in her own childhood but never had. Sadly the mother became 
more and more resentful and bitter. She started beating Karen and ruled her 
life with a rod of iron. Karen would say later that she always felt she was 
expected to bow down every day and pay homage or penance to her mother 
in return for all the sacrifices she said she had made on Karen’s behalf. She 
was made to feel ungrateful and selfish. She was rarely allowed to mix with 
others of her own age let alone have any boy friends. Karen would often be hit 
with little or no warning. Karen said she got to the stage that she would 
instinctively flinch when her mother moved her arm suddenly because she 
expected another swipe. 

This kind of treatment obviously took its toll and naturally left Karen 
with many emotional scars. Little wonder then that she doubted her self worth 

52 


as a human being. It explained why despite her undoubted talents her “Self 
Image” was so low. Karen is a very capable and intelligent woman but sadly 
she has always found it hard to make a lasting Success at anything. She 
would put great effort into her career and just as things seemed to be coming 
together she would lose interest or sabotage it in some way. The same was 
true of her marriage. She seemed to have everything in life, a good home, two 
beautiful children, a loving and supportive husband, regular work, and 
security. 

The last I heard of her was that her marriage had failed and that she 
was teaching music in a run down roughneck school trying to bring up two 
young children under the age of five single-handed. 

I have mentioned this story in a little detail because it shows that no 
matter how capable a person is, this is known as the (“I CAN FACTOR”) by 
the way, unless there is at least a reasonable level of PSI they are going to 
have big problems in life. 

It is very important you understand that unless our PSI is in a healthy 
state then it is difficult or virtually impossible to achieve success and 
happiness in life. 

You might consciously desire to have a big house, flashy car, loads of 
money in the bank, unless your subconscious mind thinks you are worth it 
then forget it. You should now be aware of the fact that if your subconscious 
mind does not want you to succeed at something then you won’t. Just when 
you are closing some big deal something totally unexpected will happen to 
muck things up. “I don’t know I seem to be so unlucky everything seems to go 
wrong for me”. If this sounds familiar don’t worry it is fairly common and is 
almost entirely due to the subconscious mind sabotaging your conscious 
efforts. 

It’s a bit like an airliner having a bomb on board which will be triggered 
to go off should the plane clime too high. The bomb is happy provided the 
plane stays at 25,000 feet but the moment it reaches 30,000 then Boooom!! 

Most people experience the same amount of good and bad luck in their 
lives. Luck is really unimportant. Of course some people win millions on the 
lottery but the percentage is so small as to be irrelevant. In fact some people 
who suddenly win relatively vast sums on the lottery end up very confused and 
depressed even guilty. (Perhaps they don’t think they are worth this success?) 

53 


How To Build a Strong PSI:


I hope you realise that it vitally important that everyone should aim to 

have the highest PSI possible. If you are a parent it should be one of your 
goals in life to ensure your children get plenty of encouragement, Love, and 
praise ,especially in their early years. As you know the level and depth of our 
respect and love for ourselves is related to what happens to us in our 
formative years. It can take a little time to rebuild a PSI particularly if you have 
a tarnished and tattered one to begin with. However the rewards are well 
worth the effort. 

Please don’t miss understand me. Liking, or loving, yourself does not 
mean you have to become vain, arrogant, or obnoxious. As I said earlier the 
more you like or love yourself the better you will be able to relate to and love 
others. People who genuinely like and accept themselves only manifest this in 
positive ways in their relationships with other people. People who are 
unpleasant, act superior, selfish, and arrogant; these people have behavioural 
problems and are, in the main, extremes, and in some extreme cases need 
professional help. 

Your subconscious mind has already built up a firm view of what it 
thinks you are and how you fit in the world around you. You have to remember 
it is a vastly complex computer and your life experiences thus far have 
programmed it accordingly. You know for example that drinking bleach or 
caustic soda is a bad idea. You also know that putting your hand in a fire is 
painful. This is obvious. Your subconscious computer is there to protect you. 
The problem is it can be over zealous as we have seen in some of the 
examples given in part two. Sometimes there seems to be a contradiction in 
how it goes about doing its job. Remember Clare who put on a lot of weight 
because she was scared of getting pregnant again. Putting on weight is not a 
healthy thing to do but her subconscious reasoned that it was necessary to 
stop her having sex with her husband. It reasoned that if she were to get 
pregnant again her father would die! 

Sometimes the subconscious is very reluctant to change and so merely 
using conscious logic will not always persuade it to change. In fact cold 
rational reasoning will almost certainly not work. With Hypnosis we can have a 
much better chance of getting positive messages through and so alter any 
negative or harmful programming that may be hiding there. 

If you already have a strong “Personal Self Image” great then the 
exercises that follow will simple maintain and build on it. But even the most 
secure and confident person needs a bit of extra help. I do not want you to 
analyse these exercises just take them on trust and follow the instructions. 
