131 


In meditative a state your body consumes much less oxygen and 
your heart beat slows to a murmur and your body achieves a state of rest at 
least twice as deep as sleep! In meditation this state can be achieved within 
about five minutes. 

Studies have shown that people who practise mediation regularly score 
significantly better when tested for: blood pressure, short-sightedness, and 
hearing. These are typical tests used to gauge a person’s biological age. 

Tests have shown that if you practise mediation regularly for about five 
years your biological age will be five years below your chronological age. 

If you practise meditation for ten or fifteen years this advantage will 
increase to the extent that you can appear to be fifteen or more years younger 
than your chronological age! 

I hope you have found this months material useful and that you will try to 
act on and use some of the information it contains. However if you did nothing 
else but try a bit of TM now and again you will reap great rewards, you could 
certainly do a lot worse. Before I go I would like to leave you with a poem from 
the first century BC written by a Taoist adept called Wen-tzu. 

The body is the temple of life. Energy is the force 
of life. Spirit is the governor of life. If one of them goes 
off balance, all three are damaged. When the spirit 
takes command, the body naturally follows it, and this 
benefits all Three Treasures. When the body leads the 
way, the spirit goes along, and this harms all Three 
Treasures. 

What he is basically saying try and use self control in your appetites. 
Don’t over do things and perhaps a little of what you fancy does you good. 
Longevity is inextricably linked to your health so take a little care. You cannot 
have one without the other. 

Anyway on the next page is a summary of some of the points raised this 
month:


132 


1. Forget about your chronological age. It’s 
irrelevant Only think about your psychological 
age! 

2. 
Improve your diet. Eat as much fresh produce as 
possible. 
3. 
Take regular exercise. Don’t be a couch potato! 
4. 
Use Self-Hypnosis to re-programme your mind to 
be young and full of the zest for life. 
5. 
Practise periods of quiet meditation. Just let the 
body rest. Completely still. 
Next I want to return to the subject of Hypnosis 
in more detail. I want to discuss the different 
types of induction techniques that are often 
used and much more besides. 

133 


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind! 


Part Seven 
Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material. Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


134 


PART SEVEN 


I thought it was about time I returned to the subject of hypnosis and 
dealt with some important aspects in more detail. The tape that accompanies 
this month release is a self-hypnotic tape which does not contain any specific 
message. It is intended for you to use whenever you wish to implant a 
suggestion of your own choosing. There is a period of time allowed, after the 
induction process has taken place, for you to use your own affirmation. After 
this time the tape will bring you back to full waking consciousness. 

HYPNOSIS CONTiNUED:


From the dawn of time the human race has tried to control the actionsof 
others by brute force or other more subtle methods. Whether this was for the 
good of the community or not is immaterial. The chance discovery of this 
natural state of hypnosis must have been exploited to the full by various 
people involved in witchcraft, black magic, or even witch doctors in Africa. No 
doubt the resultant effects of a hypnotic trance on an individual could have 
been explained away by supernatural forces, spiritual possession etc. These 
days in the twentieth century it is hoped we can be a little more rational about 
it, however there are still some unscrupulous organisations who do use 
hypnotic techniques to further their own goals as I shall explain later! 

It is important for you to understand when others are 
trying to manipulate you and how! 

There is still a lot of confusion in the minds of many people as to what 
hypnosis involves. In fact even today there is still a lot of confusion as to how 
and why hypnosis works among the many scientists and doctors who study 
and practise it. 

Early Theories about Hypnosis: 

In the west our medical origins begin with a brilliant physician called 

Hypocrites. Hypocrites, who is considered to be the “father of medicine”, 
was born on the Greek island of Cos in 460 BC and died in 377 BC. During his 
life he practised and taught the healing arts throughout Greece and wrote 

135 


many treaties on medicine. It was his theory that all our pleasures and our 
sorrows, i.e. emotions, emanated from the brain. He further stated that the 
cause of most aliments, disease, and all forms of anxiety find their origin there. 

This concept of a link between the mind and body has been with us for 
thousands of years and is common to most civilisations. There have been 
many theories to describe and explain exactly what that link consists of Some 
five hundred years after Hypocrites another Greek physician called Galen, (AD 
129 -199), developed the ideas established by Hypocrites as to how the mind 
influences the body and vice versa. His idea was that there was some kind of 
heavenly fluid which acted as a bridge between the mind and body. He 
thought that a physical ailment could be caused by a problem in the mind and 
also that an physical illness could cause mental stress. 

This concept of a substance acting as a bridge in this way remained in 
the minds of scientists and philosophers for many centuries to come. All sorts 
of theories were developed but it was not until the time of Sir Isaac Newton, 
(1642-1727) that the notion of animal magnetism gained particular popularity. 
Magnetism is a curious force, like gravity, which we can prove exists and yet it 
is invisible to the naked eye. This force seemed a useful way of explaining 
away the seemingly unexplainable. Of course nowadays it seems too 
simplistic but in those days it had its uses. In some ways these early theories 
had in some ways, curious similarities with those held in the east. If we 
substituted the term animal magnetism for Qi or Prana there would appear to 
be a connection. 

Mesmerism:-

Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815) is worth a mention mainly becauseof 
the work he did and the fame he achieved, or perhaps notoriety would be a 
better word, he was responsible for putting Hypnotism, or mesmerism as it 
was then called, firmly on the medical map. 

He trained initially as a priest before studying law before eventually 
switching to medicine and qualifying as a doctor by the age of thirty two. He 
was widely read and knew the theories concerning astronomy and Newton’s 
laws of gravity which greatly helped put the theories of animal magnetism to 
the fore. 

Mesmer thought that it was possible to restore our state of health by 
harmonising and balancing these heavenly forces within us. Again these ideas 
had an uncanny similarity to those long held in the east. The problem was that 
with all the great discoveries being made in fields of mathematics, electricity, 

136 


and magnetism, among others, he really thought he could offer a sound logical 
and scientific explanation for what was then called animal magnetism. 

His treatment of patients involved the use of magnets and other 
paraphernalia. He himself was reputed to wear a great lilac cloak and held an 
iron rod in one hand. In the centre of the room he had placed a large vat out 
of which metal bars were projected. The vat would contain water and iron 
filings and each patient would sit around it grasping one of these iron bars. 
Mirrors where carefully positioned around the room so as to reflect a gentle 
light on the proceedings and soft music was often played to create the right 
atmosphere. In this amazing setting Mesmer is said to have walked around to 
each patient and touched them on the shoulder with his iron bar. 

Now you have to realise that these people would have been in a very 
heightened state of expectancy. Many said they experienced very curious 
sensations through their bodies while others fell about in convulsions. In any 
case after a few sessions they would state that they felt cured of whatever the 
illness was they were suffering from. 

Today this use of ritual would be considered pointless but at that time it 
might have provided the necessary catalysis to help the patients cure 
themselves. It gave them a link to their subconscious mind. It was a bit like 
using a placebo. 

Another technique he used was to strap magnets to a patients body in 
the belief that this would harmonise the various forces within the body. Again 
these patients would claim to feel strange feelings running up and down their 
bodies while having this treatment and would often declare themselves cured. 

The success that Mesmer enjoyed and the fame and wealth it attracted 
also attracted great suspicion and envy, from his more orthodox medical 
colleagues. Although what I have described here is not strictly speaking 
hypnosis there are subtle links between two. As you probably now realise a 
strong positive expectation of a desired outcome can have a very powerful 
effect on the mind. 

It was one Mesmer’s pupils who is said to have discovered 
somnambulism. In this state a person can obey instructions, talk, open their 
eyes and yet still remain in a trance. 

News of Mesmer’s work and that of his pupils and associates spread 
throughout Europe and even to the USA. A number of physicians witnessed 
demonstrations given by Richard Chenevix, himself a fellow of the Royal 
Society, in London in 1829. Among the audience was a John Elliotson. 
Elliotson was born in 1786 the son of a south London chemist. After 

137 


graduating from Cambridge and then qualifying as a physician he travelled to 

138 


Europe studying in various continental schools. Upon his return he set up his 
practice near the hospitals of Guy’s and St Thomas’s. 

He was a man of strong views who did not suffer fools gladly and often 
had problems with figures in authority. He was elected Professor of Medicine 
at the then new “New University College” of the University of London. The 
university was non-denominational and this was surprisingly the first time 
medicine was taught at university level. 

Elliotson pioneered many new and important techniques in medicine. 
He taught medical students at the bedside of the patients in order to give 
them greater experience. Before this students would serve a five-year 
apprenticeship with an older doctor. He was the first doctor to use a 
stethoscope and taught the correct way to examine the chest among many 
other useful discoveries on the use of drugs. 

He became interested in the theories emanating from Europe at the 
time namely the work of Franz Gall. Gall maintained that our emotions could 
have a physiological effect on the body and were independent of our will. 

This theory laid the foundation for the later work of Sigmond Freud and 
the study of the subconscious or unconscious mind. Elliotson was originally a 
little sceptical about mesmerism but soon became a great supporter of its 
use. He did in fact open the “Mesmeric Hospital” in Fittzroy Square in London. 

In his journal “The Zoist” he detailed many of the cases he treated. 
One such case was that of a woman who had an amputation at the thigh 
while under mesmerism and who felt no pain. You have to bear in mind that 
many of his contemporaries were still treating their patients by bleeding them 
with leeches. Anaesthesia did not exist, except for brandy, and so surgeons 
had to resort to strapping their patients to the table in order to carry out an 
operation like an amputation. Against this grisly background Elliotson went on 
to publish the details of some seventy six similar operations which were 
carried out where patients felt no pain! 

Elliotson was not the only physician using mesmerism as a form of 
anaesthesia. Other operations were featured in “The Zoist” one concerned a 
surgeon called “Mr Ward” who amputated a man’s leg. There was also a 
Scottish surgeon called James Esdaile working in Calcutta who carried out 
literally hundreds of painless operations. He had the patients “mesmerised” 
for one and a half hours each day for five days. Although he had the total 
support of the Governor General at the time his reports were rejected by the 
medical authorities. Despite the fact that there were at the time records of at 

139 


least four hundred operations using mesmerism as a method of anaesthesia it 
was abandoned in 1850’s when chloroform and then ether took over. 

In 1848 Elliotson published an article called “Cure of a true cancer of 
the female breast with mesmerism”. His patient, a middle aged lady, had 
developed a large breast tumour. Originally he intended to prepare the patient 
for surgery. She had been seen by many of the leading surgeons of that time 
all of whom confirmed the nature of the growth in her breast. Some advised an 
immediate surgery while some declared the growth inoperable. Elliotson 
discovered that she was a good hypnotic subject capable of going into deep 
trance. He mesmerised her often sometimes up to three times a day and kept 
her in a very happy and peaceful trance for several hours at a time. Her 
progress was slow initially but she started to put on some weight and her 
general state of well being and strength increased. Eventually her tumour 
decreased and after a period of five years had completely disappeared a fact 
confirmed by those very same eminent surgeons who had diagnosed her 
condition all those years before. 

There were many people experimenting with mesmerism around this 
time but the practice of using elaborate rituals involving magnets was 
receding. People were trying hard to explain just what mesmerism was. The 
concept of animal magnetism and ethereal fluids was dead. Instead a notion 
that mesmerism was a form of nervous sleep, or hypnos, began to take a hold. 
Hypnos was the Greek God of sleep and this was obviously where the term 
hypnosis originated. 

Today we have a more scientific explanation and know it to be a 
psychological as well as a physical condition although there is still a lot we 
need to discover. There is no doubt it is possible to induce sleep in a subject 
which is indistinguishable from normal sleep but it is also possible to put a 
person in a trance who can walk around the room and appear to behave quite 
normally. Post-hypnotic suggestion, which is where a person is given a 
suggestion while in trance and told to carry some task on returning to 
consciousness, is now a well known technique. The point is the subject is still 
in a form of trance until that task has been executed. 

To this day we still do not really know why the subconscious mind 
reacts to suggestions while in a hypnotic trance. There have been many 
theories about hypnosis over the past hundred years or so. 

Goal-Directed Striving:


Robert White from Harvard University in 1941 stated that “hypnotic 
behaviour is meaningful, goal-directed striving, its most general goal being to 

140 


behave like a hypnotised person as this is continuously defined by the 
operator and understood by the subject”. He maintained that a person must 
want to become hypnotised. While in trance it is possible to put a person in a 
state of catalepsy this is when a persons limbs can be moved and placed in 
any position and rigidly remain there. When the hypnotist suggests that the 
limbs are so stiff they cannot be moved the subject indeed finds that they 
cannot move them. White maintained that far from the hypnotist having an 
unnatural power over the subject the subject is in actual fact just co-operating 
with the hypnotist. If you like the subjects will is not strong enough to resist the 
suggestions of the hypnotist. This is a very difficult area, and one where a lot 
of controversy still exists. 

It was about this time that the concept of “an altered state of the 
person” took hold. 

Theory of Atavism:


This theory was put forward by Ainslie Meares an Australian 
psychiatrist. He reasoned that logical thought was a comparatively recent 
function. He thought that in primitive man basic ideas and concepts would 
have been readily accepted without criticism and this process would in pad 
explain the state of hypnosis. In other words we thought that when we are 
placed in a trance, we regress to our primitive state of consciousness. 

We certainly know that under hypnosis our critical factor is temporally 
suspended. 

The Theory of Role Playing:


After some twenty years of studies Dr T. Barber from the USA 
thought that a hypnotised subject’s performance depends upon his attitudes 
and expectations of how they thought a hypnotised person would behave. The 
willingness of a subject to co-operate is very important. These ideas are 
closely related to those of Robert White. 

Goal-directed Fantasy:-

Nich Spanos, an associate of Dr Barber, extended the ideas of 
“RolePlaying” into what he termed “Goal-directed fantasy”. An example of this 
could be that a hypnotist asks his subject to lift their arm and at the same time 
the subject imagines their arm resting on a large deflated balloon which then 
gradually inflates, then the subject is described as taking part in “goal-directed 
fantasy”. Indeed hand levitation exercises are used a lot in hypnosis to test 
the level of trance in a subject. You could very easily try this yourself When 

141 


you feel you are feeling very relaxed just imagine your arm being lifted in the 

manner just described or imagine some other way in which your arm 
might be raised on pulleys or whatever. 

Most of the theories just mentioned are really comments on hypnotic 
behaviour rather than a definition of what hypnosis actually is. Most have 
more than an element of truth about them. What all researchers agree on is 
that hypnosis is an altered and highly increased state of awareness. The 
degree to which a subject is receptive to suggestions made depends on the 
level and deepness of the trance. We will look into the different levels of 
trance in a moment. What I want to do now is give you an idea as to the 
physiological nature of hypnosis, what happens to your body while under 
hypnosis. 

The Scientific Nature of Hypnosis:


Until about 1952 hypnosis was thought to be a type or form of sleep. It 
was not possible to get any concrete evidence as to what went on in the 
human brain during hypnosis until the electroencephalograph, or EEG for 
short, was used in research. 

What an EEG does is record the regular electrical pulses emanating 
from the brain on a graph. Research into the nature of sleep has shown that 
we each go through five main stages of sleep. 

When we start to doze off to sleep we emit high amplitude waves from 
between eight or twelve cycles every second known as alpha waves or alpha 
rhythms. These rhythms are also present when we are deeply relaxed and 
quiet. When dozing off our eyes make smooth rolling movements. After a few 
minutes we reach the second stage. At this stage the alpha rhythms are 
replaced with slower low voltage waves. After a few more minutes the third 
stage is reached and the waves slow a little more and the eye movements 
reduce and disappear. In the fourth stage the waves are even slower but the 
voltage increases. During the fifth stage we emit a low frequency high voltage 
rhythm around one cycle each second. 

Now during our sleep we often have periods where our eyes move 
more quickly. This stage became known as “Rapid Eye Movement” or REM 
sleep. At this time our brains emit very fast waves of up to twenty cycles each 
second known as beta waves. During this period a number of very important 
things are happening within our bodies. It is at this time that we dream and if 
awakened we could give accurate descriptions of our dreams. The eye 
movements are very similar to those that might be made by someone who is 

142 


awake and is looking about them. When REM sleep stops the first stage 
of sleep starts over again. 

When a reading is made of a person who is in a hypnotic trance 
however they do not give the same results. They appear to show that the 
person is simply relaxed. They will show very similar readings to those given 
by someone in the first stages of sleep, alpha waves, but when a suggestion is 
made by the hypnotist these diminish because his mind is alerted. However if 
the hypnotist gives the suggestion to sleep while under hypnosis the EEG 
recording will show a reading virtually the same as someone who is asleep. 

When readings are taken of a subject while they are being induced to a 
deeper level of trance the alpha waves maintain their frequency but there is a 
big reduction in the voltage. The voltage, however, increases if the subject is 
told to sleep. What this research suggested was that when a person in is 
hypnosis they are in a very special state of deep relaxation. This would explain 
why meditation so good for us because in this state our bodies are truly 
rested. So while in hypnosis we are neither conscious in the normal sense 
neither are we asleep. 

When very sensitive apparatus is used to measure the brains electrical 
variations there are some very interesting changes that occur while in 
hypnosis. This is particularly true if a subject is asked to imagine a scene or 
perhaps imagines he can smell a the scent of a flower. Curiously these 
changes within the brain do not occur if the person actually smells a flower in 
a normal waking state. So there is strong physical evidence that hypnosis is 
an altered state of the mind and brain. 

The Central Nervous System:


Our central nervous system consists of the spinal cord which is 
connected to the brain. It contains nerve cells and nerve fibres which transmit 
information to and from our cells. Our central nervous system balances all the 
other systems within our bodies and will under normal circumstances keeps 
things in harmony. Most nerve connections within the body are transmitted to 
and from the brain via the spinal cord, some other connections are made 
direct to the brain like sight, hearing, and smell. 

Our brains have evolved and developed over many thousands of 
years. The outer area of the brain is called the cortex and this is the most 
advanced area. The way in which our brains obtain information from the body 
is 

143 


incredibly complex and it is filtered and processed in the oldest area of 
the brain called the Ascending Reticular Activating System, or RA. This 
cluster of nerve fibres comes up from the lower part of the brain known as the 
fourth ventricle. After the RA it moves on into the thalamus which is situated 
in the front of the brain with the hypothalamus beneath it. The RA also 
connects to the limbic system, which is one of our most primitive areas of 
development, and this in turn is connected to the cortex. The limbic system is 
thought to be mainly concerned with our human emotions. 

The electrical activity within our brain relies on the stimuli it receives 
from the RA system. Our awareness of our surroundings and our reactions to 
it are modified via this system and this is why we produce variations on the 

EEG. 

In normal waking consciousness our RA system will register activity on 
the EEG but if we are very relaxed, sitting quietly in darkness with little or no 
outside stimuli, or drifting off to sleep, it virtually closes down. When you are 
awake the RA constantly feeds a steady stream of reminders through to the 
brain. Like everything else to do with the functioning of the brain this is a very 
complex area. 

The emphasis of one kind of stimuli over another is regulated via the 
RA system. If you are concentrating on something like a good book or 
watching a gripping programme on the TV our other conscious senses are 
overridden and we become unaware of them. If some one speaks to us we 
may not hear them, we block it out. The RA system can be effected by illness 
and drugs which reduces awareness. 

During a hypnotic induction it is thought that words spoken by the 
hypnotist passes along the RA’s network of nerve fibres and the attention of 
the subject is totally focused on them. In a state of deep relaxation the RA 
dampens down all the other stimuli which would otherwise flow through to the 
central nervous system. Once information is passed in to the limbic system it 
is then carried on to the appropriate area of the brain. Emotions like 
excitement, anxiety, among others, are dampened down and so we pass into 
the state of hypnosis. 

Some patients suffering from very aggressive and often dangerous 
behaviour have undergone small operations to the limbic area. As a result 
they go through a drastic change in behaviour, most notable of which, is that 
they no longer show any signs of fear or anger. 

Some interesting experiments have shown that different emotions can 
be triggered by passing a small electrical current into a part of the brain 

144 


known as the temporal lobe cortex. Sometimes subjects can remember 
events from their past which they thought they had long since forgotten. 
Significantly they not only remembered those events but all the emotions that 
went with them at the time those events took place. 

Apparently these subjects recall events every bit as accurately as 
other subjects do under hypnosis! Not only do they remember the events and 
their emotions to them but they also retain their impressions or interpretations 
of those events whether they were true or false. As we know regressing 
people under hypnosis is a very useful tool in correcting there present 
behaviour. 

Stages Of Hypnotic Induction:


To try and fathom all the different stages of hypnosis as a subject 
undergoes induction is rather like peeling away the layers of an onion. There 
are obviously some very subtle changes that take place as they drift from one 
state of hypnosis into another, it is not really possible to be too dogmatic. The 
following however will give you a general idea as to what takes place when 
someone is being hypnotised. 

Hypnoidal Condition:


This is the first quiet state you achieve while you start to relax and get 
comfortable. Your eyes are normally closed and you are aware of things 
going on around you but you slowly concentrate on the sound of the 
hypnotist’s voice, whether it be on a tape or in real life, and you begin to 
forget your surroundings. In this stage you are not yet receptive to any 
detailed affirmations, your conscious mind or critical factor has not been 
distracted. From this state you drift into a deeper state of light trance. 

Light Trance:


In this state you are more relaxed and your body will appear still and 
quiet. There is sometimes a slight movement of the eye lids at this 
stage. After a time the complexion of the face becomes more ruddy as the 
blood vessels enlarge to allow the circulation to move freely. In a light trance 
simple suggestions like hand levitation can be attempted. Simple imaginary 
scenes can be given but the degree to which these scenes can be visualised 
are often limited at this stage. Some people who are new to hypnosis find it 
difficult to progress to the next stage at first, however if the relaxation 

145 


continues a medium state of trance can be achieved. 

Medium Trance:


It is at this stage that your breathing slows markedly as your conscious 
mind quietens down. The colour of your cheeks will become redder as your 
blood vessels dilate a little more. Your ability to visualise things will be 
stronger in this state as your conscious mind lets go. In this state mild 
suggestions to null the bodies sensitivity to pain can often be attempted for 
things like dentistry. It is also possible to ask a subject to forget things, 
amnesia, and also to test for catalepsy. What a hypnotist will do is suggest 
that your arm feels rigid and cannot move even if you tried to. The same sort 
of thing can be suggested concerning the eye lids by suggesting they cannot 
open because they are glued together etc. As you try to open them you are 
told to drift even deeper into hypnosis. 

Of course since you are co-operating with the hypnotist you 
cannot open your eyes because you don’t really want to open them. By 
accepting this state of affairs you are happy to go even deeper in to 
trance. If you do open them then you either wish to come out of trance 
or the hypnotist has misjudged the level of trance you have reached. 

Deep Trance:


As you relax even more you will drift deeper and deeper into deep trance. 
Your breathing will slow down even more and this is very restful for your brain 
and the rest of the body. In deep trance most of the therapeutic techniques 
can be used like regression, more advanced and complex forms of analgesia. 
Most hypnotists do not feel the need to go any deeper than a deep trance. 

Somnambulistic Trance:


This is the state whereby a hypnotised person can be given 
instructions to open their eyes and move around the room, talk, carry out 
various tasks, hallucinate etc. The term is derived from Latin somnus, which 
means sleep, and ambulare, which means walk. The most common example 
of a somnambulistic trance is a person hypnotised by a stage hypnotist. A 
person can be regressed to an earlier age and talk and behave as a small 
child. In this state some therapists from earlier time produced enough 
analgesia to open up the abdomen to allow major surgery! 

146 


Stuporous Trance:


There is another very special, and relatively, unknown state of 
hypnosis which some subjects are able to enter known as the “Stuporous 
Trance”. Anyone in this state shows an inability to appreciate the “Self. They 
lose a total awareness of themselves as individual persons with there own 
unique characters and reactions. It has been known for medical personnel 
called in to examine someone in such a trance without being told the subject 
has been hypnotised, think that they have been drugged or are in some kind 
of narcotic state. It is comparatively difficult to get someone to enter this state 
because there is an in-built objection to losing oneself so completely into the 
control of someone else. 

In the East highly trained adepts are able to reach similar deep levels 
of trance. The loss of “ego” and the concept of “self” is the aim of their 
meditations in order to reach some deeper meaning of their existence. 
However these people are experts trained by masters who have in turn being 
trained by masters throughout the centuries. 

Delving into the truly deeper levels of trance and consciousness we 
are entering the murky areas of “Mind Control” or “Brain Washing” 
techniques. 

In part one I explained that there had not been a case of anyone being 
harmed by the therapeutic use of Hypnosis and I stand by this statement. I 
also said that it was not possible to force someone to act against their will 
simple by putting them in a trance and giving them suggestions. You might 
recall that I mentioned the Social Cornpliance Theory. This basically states 
that the subject under Hypnosis is basically co-operating with the Hypnotist 
mainly because it suits him to do so 

It has long been thought that it was not possible to make someone act 
in a way which would go against their normal beliefs, morals, or wishes etc.. 
Most hypnotists believe that a hypnotised person would not behave in way 
that would normally appear out of character unless that person is 
predisposed to do so! 

There is a prevailing idea the hypnosis can only be used for positive 
effects. People often ask me can hypnosis be used to control someone’s mind 
against their will? 

I am also asked if hypnosis is so powerful a tool for good can it not 
also be used by unscrupulous people to do harm. Many practitioners answer 

147 


this sort of question with an emphatic NO. The usual procedure is to 
say that under hypnosis you cannot force a person to act in away that is 
against his or her character. 

Although this answer is perfectly correct as far as it goes, it is however 
simplistic. It is true in the main that you cannot force someone to act in a way 
that is alien to their true character however how do you know what that 
person’s true character is? 

Hypnosis is dealing with the subconscious or unconscious mind. A 
person’s subconscious mind may hold all sorts of aims, desires, wants, 
character traits which the conscious mind keeps back or holds in check 
because of the restrictions and demands society puts on all of us. In other 
words we simply cannot just behave exactly as we might wish. 

Who really knows what our true character is anyway? 

Hypnosis has been around since the dawn of time. It has been used by 
our ancestors for thousands of years. Everyone has experienced some form 
of hypnotic trance whether they were aware of it or not. In fact everyone 
probably experiences something very similar at least twice a day. 

Ignorance of the nature and power of hypnosis is probably potentially 
more harmful or dangerous. Its power for good in our lives vastly out ways 
any harm that could befall you from using it. 

I remember reading about a demonstration of hypnosis where a young 
male doctor had placed an attractive young lady in a deep trance and had had 
her carry out various tasks and tests to show the extent of her trance. 
Someone in the audience asked the very question as to what extent does the 
therapist have control over the actions of the subject. The hypnotist explained 
that the therapist does not in actual fact have control over the subject and 
explained that if he asked the girl to do anything which would be against her 
normal behaviour or beliefs she would refuse. To prove his point he asked the 
girl, still in deep trance, to remove her clothes whereupon she awakened from 
her trance and slapped the young doctor around the face! 

Now this impressed the audience. It seemed to prove the doctor’s 
point that he was unable to force his subject into doing something against her 
will. Deep down she still knew that she was involved in a demonstration of 
hypnosis and that there was an almost exclusively male audience watching 
her. 

148 


However the situation might have backfired if the girl had some deep 
routed desires to remove her clothes in company. Also there are ways an 
unscrupulous hypnotist can engineer the situation to meet his own ends! 

Suppose the girl had been given suggestions that she was all alone in 
her home. If the suggestion was then made that she was now in her bathroom 
and about to undress in order to take a bath she might well have obliged. This 
would involve inducing a state of hallucination and amnesia. I have no doubt 
that in this way it is possible to degrade a person and possibly harm them 
particularly if the hypnotist is inexperienced. 

I would like to stress once again that you must 
not use the information contained in this course to 
gain control or gain some advantage over others. 

This information is for your own use only and I am giving it to you so 
that you can achieve a better understanding of how your own mind works and 
how others might try and use this knowledge against you. 

Can Hypnotism Be Used To Cause Harm? 

There are some very prestigious medical bodies from around the world 
who would like nothing better than legislate against the use of hypnosis other 
than by “qualified therapists” that have been properly trained and have 
medical qualifications or qualifications in psychotherapy. 

In the UK, Parliament passed the “Hypnotism Act 1952” in which clause 2(1) 

states:


No person shall give an exhibition, demonstration or performance of 
hypnotism on any living person at or in connection with an entertainment to 
which the public are admitted whether on payment or otherwise unless the 
controlling bodies authority have authorised that exhibition, demonstration or 
performance. 

This did not restrict the use of hypnotism for long because other 
venues, i.e. clubs where the public are admitted to have dinner etc., have 
appeared, which seemed to get around the confines of this act. 

My own personal view is somewhere in between. I do NOT like to see 

149 


exhibitions of hypnosis on the TV merely for the purposes of entertainment. 

However hypnotism is such a powerful tool to do good I would 
not want to see it banned or restricted. It is after all a natural phenomenon 
which should be more widely available not less. However we must be 
realistic. Hypnotism is a very powerful force but can it be used to cause 
harm? 

What I am about to reveal to you will sound a bit far fetched even 
fantastic! You may think I have flipped or been lying in the sun for too 
long but I can assure you it is all demonstrably true. 

There are some unscrupulous organisations who routinely use 
hypnotic techniques on some unsuspecting members of the public. Because 
there might be legal consequences if I were to mention these organisations 
by name I will only mention them in general. If nothing else it will help keep 
you on your guard should anyone try something similar on you. 

Some very well known “religious sects” induce hypnotic trances in their 
recruits in order to recruit and retain their loyalty. It follows that anyone even 
vaguely interested in a sect will already be predisposed to their beliefs and 
philosophy. These quasi religious cults routinely induce a hypnotic trance in 
their prospective converts as a Part of their mind control methods. 

The point is that these unsuspecting recruits are not told what is 
happening to them. If they were told that their “trainers” were putting them into 
a hypnotic trance they would be horrified. The fact is the vast majority of the 
population is ignorant as to what hypnosis is and what it involves and this 
makes them vulnerable. If you asked most people off the street what they 
thought hypnosis was they would probably talk about swinging watches and 
crystal balls etc. 

There are a number of ways you can induce a trance in someone and 
we shall look at these in more detail next month. However the aim is always 
the same, which is to suspend or distract the critical factor. 

In one cult the technique they use to do this is to make a recruit sit in a 
chair completely motionless while “trainers” take it in turns to monitor them. 
They are scolded when they twitch or fidget, the aim being to get the recruit to 
sit totally still for two hours or more. What is happening is that the recruit 
relinquishes his or her control of their body and emotions to the trainer. The 
recruit’s conscious mind is looking for movement or stimuli but of course there 
isn’t any. 

150 


Their conscious mind is totally focused on the trainer which suspends 
their critical factor and they drift very effectively into a trance. Obviously in this 
instance they are willing to co-operate with their trainer but this is no different 
from any session you might have with a hypnotist. After all you have to cooperate 
with a hypnotist otherwise he cannot help you achieve your goal. 

In a religious cult the aim is to teach obedience and collective control. 
You are taught how to be controlled and how to control others and their 
methods can be very effective. 

You have probably read about families kidnapping members of their 
family from such cults. The victims themselves often don’t want to be 
rescued. In fact they are often extremely hostile towards their rescuers. In 
such cases an extensive deprogramming has to be gone through in order to 
return these people to a “normal” life. 

In the main the kind of people who let themselves fall for this kind of 
thing are very vulnerable and impressionable. The concept of “social 
compliance” still applies. They want to be controlled in the main and cooperate 
with the person, often many more than just one, trying to control 
them. This broadly speaking is what the “Social Compliance Theory” is all 
about. 

One way a cult prevents its recruits from leaving is by using “phobia 
indoctrination”. It is sometimes called “triggered phobic response”. What this 
means is that trainers implant or programme irrational fears into your 
subconscious mind as to what will happen to you if you ever left the cult. You 
might typically be told that you will go insane, be hit by a car, get cancer etc. 
1 think you get the general idea. Different cults use different phobias and 
believe me it is very effective! It has been described a prison without bars. 
Nice people!! 

I am telling you these things so that you will be on your guard. Be 
careful if you find yourself listening to a lecture given by a speaker who uses 
a soft monotonous tone when speaking. This is particularly true if the setting 
uses soft lighting and gentle music. 

Because most people have a very distorted idea as to what hypnotism 
really is, they often don’t realise it when someone tries to put them into a 
trance. For this reason I believe everyone should study Self-Hypnosis. By 
learning how to control your own mind you will learn to detect the signs if 
someone else tries anything on you without your consent. 

151 


Have you ever seen American evangelists on TV, or on stage, where 
they invoke the holy spirit and just touch a member of the audience, i.e 
someone they have prepared earlier, on the head and pronounce them cured 
of whatever ailment they suffer from? 

Various government agencies from around the world have carried out 
experiments in “sensory deprivation”. What this basically entails is placing 
somebody in a situation where they are unable to receive any outside stimuli 
from their surroundings. In other words their RA system of the brain are 
effectively shut down because they are not being stimulated. This is often 
done by placing the person in a waterproof suit with breathing apparatus and 
immersing them totally in a vat of warm water. After several hours a profound 
trance state is sometimes achieved. Although this sounds more like a form of 
torture, and extreme sensory deprivation has been used as a form of torture 
by certain countries, in the west some companies are offering this technique 
as a form of relaxation therapyl 

There are interesting parallels between this and what some Tibetan 
monks practise. As part of their training some monks are walled up in a small 
room for 39 months in total darkness and without contact with the outside 
world. Their food is provided through a small hole. Now most of us would find 
this treatment, solitary confinement, intolerable and it would probably result in 
some form of mental illness. However to a Tibetan monk this period of 
solitude is eagerly awaited because they have been trained for this moment 
and expect great rewards from their efforts. They practise deep breathing and 
meditation techniques during this time. Obviously the solitude is helpful to 
achieve their desired goal. If I were to tell you about some of the things that 
Tibetan monks are reported to be able to do, you would not believe me. 

The reason I mention sensory deprivation is because it provides us 
another example of how our mind behaves and how it is possible to reach the 
deeper recesses of our consciousness. 

The book “The Manchurian Candidate” by Richard Condon which was 
published in 1958 and made into a Hollywood film in the 1960’s, tells a story 
about brain washed, hypnotised, assassins. This film was released around 
the world but, for reasons that have never been explained, it was not allowed 
to be seen in the USA for many years. 

The CIA carried out experiments in the 50’s on brain washing and 
other mind controlling techniques. They set up a team, which some believe 
was successful, in creating assassins capable of killing foreign heads of state 
or prominent American political figures. 

152 


I know that to some of you this sounds ridiculous however these 
historical facts are recorded in the CIA’s own memo from the period outlining 
their experiments. 

You might think why bother? After all most countries will have trained 
assassins on their books who they could call on as needed without resorting to 
mind control. However to assassinate a prominent political figure is fraught 
with danger that the killer might get caught and spill the beans. 

The operatives the CIA trained however were very special. They would 
be programmed to kill their victim and then develop total amnesia afterwards. 
In this way it would be difficult to trace the connection back to the CIA, even 
under strenuous interrogation. 

From the recorded interviews with Sirhan Sirhan, who was executed for 
the assassination of Robert. F. Kennedy, it is clear that he under went some 
kind of mental programming and hypnosis. At his trial psychiatrists testified 
that he had been hypnotised and the prison psychologist pleaded with the 
judge to be allowed to deprogram Sirhan Sirhan but this was denied. Sirhan 
Sirhan had no recollection of the assignation despite the fact that he obviously 
carried it out. 

If you think this is incredible wait until you hear the next bit. The 
component in the CIA who carried out the experiments to produce “manturian 
candidates” went on carry out what was known as “terminal experiments”. 

Subjects were programmed to effectively kill 
themselves. 

Horrible though this sounds this not as Incredible as it sounds. Some of 
the native North American tribes have known about this ability for centuries. 
Doctors in America have witnessed apparently healthy people simply decide 
to give up on life and wither away and die. The power of the mind is awesome. 

What I have just described has next to nothing to do with hypnosis as it 
is used everyday. Mind control and brain washing techniques are a perversion 
of what hypnosis is really all about. 

The reason some fear hypnosis and what it can do is simply because 
they know little or nothing about it. lf someone tried to hypnotise me I could go 
into a hypnotic trance within a few seconds if I wanted to. However if I didn’t 
want to then there is no way they could put me into a trance. Because I know 

153 


what is involved, how it works I can either accept it or reject it. I have the 
control and I have the choice. Everyone should have this knowledge and that 
choice. 

Hypnosis can lead to problems if you are careless. If you let yourself be 
hypnotised by anyone who has little or no experience, no knowledge of your 
medical history or psychiatric background, then things might go wrong. 

Anxious people might become depressed or more anxious. Depressed 
people might become even more depressed and even suicidal! Psychotic 
cases can become more psychotic. 

Medical conditions like cerebral tumours, disjunction of the thyroid, and 
many other conditions can only be diagnosed by properly trained people. 
These conditions might well show psychological symptoms which can be 
misdiagnosed by an inexperienced or unqualified hypnotist. 

If you are daft enough to let yourself be used in a stage show of 
hypnotism and problems arise as a result then you have only got yourself to 
blame. The most common problems that arise from such shows are 
orthopaedic. What stage hypnotists used to like doing is induce a state of 
catalepsy, previously mentioned, whereby the subject becomes very rigid. The 
head of the subject would typically be placed on the seat of one chair while 
the feet are placed on another. Then other people are invited to sit on the 
subject’s stomach and legs taking their full weight. 

Impressive though this might be to an audience it puts enormous 
pressure on that person’s back. If the subject has a history of back pain 
serious damage can be done. 

Hypnosis can be misused as I have tried to show but so can a lot of 
things. Nearly all of us drive cars but we all know that cars can and do kill on 
occasions but nobody would propose banning them just for that reason. If 
hypnotism were not the powerful tool it is then why bother to use it in the first 
place. 

The reason I have told you these things is 
because in the next Part I want to show you the 
different techniques hypnotists use to place people 
into trances. I wanted you to be aware of the 
problems that can arise if hypnosis is used 
indiscriminately. Some of the techniques are 
advanced but very effective. 

154 


 I am telling you these things for your 


information only. I don’t expect you to rush off down 
the local pub and start putting people into trances! 

End of Sermon 

I will to tell you about one of this century’s most 
brilliant exponents of hypnosis. I also want to tell you 
how you can learn to read a book in only a matter of a 
few minutes, and a whole load of other incredible 
stuff!! 

155


How To Tap The Incredible 
Secret 
Powers Of Your Own Mind! 



Part Eight 


Disclaimer 

The author and publisher of this material are NOT RESPONSIBLE in any manner for any 
injuries which may occur through reading or following the instructions in this material.Any 
reader who experiences discomfort from carrying out any of the exercises in this material 
should seek medical advice. 


© A.C. Mail Order 1999-2000. All Rights Reserved. 
Neither the whole nor any part of this document may be reproduced, stored in any data 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form whatever by means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise. Any breach will be enforced at law. 


156 


PART EIGHT 


No effort was made to pick him up. Instead, as he paused for breath for 
fresh screaming, he was told quickly, simply, sympathetically, “That hurts awful, 
Robert. That hurts terrible.” 

Right then, without any doubt, my son knew that I knew what I was talking 
about. He could agree with me and he knew I was agreeing with him completely. 
Therefore he could listen respectfully to me, because I had demonstrated that I 
understood the situation fully. 

Rather than reassure the boy, he carried on in the same way:


Then I told Robert, “And it will keep right on hurting.” In this simple statement, 
named his own fear confirmed his own judgement of the situation, demonstrated my 
good intelligent grasp of the entire matter and my entire agreement with him, since 
right then he could foresee a lifetime of anguish and pain for himself. 

The next step for him and for me was to declare, as he took another breath, 
“And you really wish it would stop hurting”. . Again, we were in full agreement and 
he was ratified and even encouraged in this wish. And it was his wish, deriving 
entirely from within him and constituting his own urgent need. 

With the situation so defined, I could then offer a suggestion with some 
certainly of its acceptance. This suggestion was, “Maybe it will stop hurting in a 
little while, in just a minute or two.” 

This was a suggestion in full accord with his own needs and wishes and, 
because it was qualified by “maybe it will,” it was not in contradiction to his own 
understandings of the situation. Thus he could accept the idea and initiate his 
response to it. 

What you have just read is a case where the son of master hypnotist , 
MiltonH. Erickson M.D., had fallen down the back stairs of his home and had 
split his lip and dislodged an upper tooth. To continue:


Robert knew that he hurt, that he was a damaged person: he could see his 
blood upon the pavement, taste it in his mouth and see it on his hands. And yet, like 
all other human beings, he too could desire narcissistic distinction in his 
misfortune, along with the desire even more for narcissistic comfort. Nobody wants 
a headache; since a headache must be endured, let it be so colossal that only the 
sufferer could endure it. Human pride is so curiously good and comforting! 
Therefore, Robert ‘s attention was doubly directed to two vital issues of 
comprehensible importance to him by the simple statements. “That‘s an awful lot of 
blood on the pavement. Is it good, red, strong blood? Look carefully, Mother, and 
see. I think it is, but I want you to be sure. 
