
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint from the following: 

Excerpts used on several pages were first published in Executive Excellence by 
Ken Shelton and are used with permission. 

“Autobiography in Five Short Chapters,” copyright © 1993 by Portia Nelson, 
from There’s a Hole in My Sidewalk. Beyond Words Publishing, Hillsboro, 
Oregon. Used by permission. All rights reserved. 

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in 
regard to the subject matters covered. It is sold with the understanding that the 
author and publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, mental health, or other 
professional service. 

Names and identifying charcteristics of individuals mentioned in this book have 
been changed to perserve anonymity 

THE DNA OF SUCCESS. Copyright © 2002 by Jack M. Zufelt. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be 
used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except 
in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information 
address HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, 
NY 10022. 

FIRST EDITION 

Designed by Kate Nichols 

Printed on acid-free paper 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Zufelt, Jack M. 
The DNA of success : know what you want . . . to get what you want / Jack 

M. Zufelt.—1st ed. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 0-06-000658-7 (alk. paper) 
1. Success. 2. Happiness. I. Title. 
BF637.S8 Z84 2003 
158—dc21 

2002069699 

02 03 04 05 06 RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


The 

DNA 


of Success 


To you 
and to all that is within you to become 



Contents 

Introduction: Something Is Missing 1 

Part I Core Desires

 1. Success Springs from Desire 11

 2. Heart-Set over Mind-Set 27

 3. Identifying Your Core Desires 41 

Part II Conquering Force

 4. The Conquering Force Withing You 67

 5. The Success Attitude 79

 6. The Special Force of Mentoring 91 

Part III Application Areas

 7. Creating Great Family Relationships 105

 8. Achieving Your Financial Desires 129

 9. Enhancing Your Self-Image 143 

10. Cultivating Social Relationships 157 

11. Improving Your Mind 169 

12. Engaging Your Spiritual Being 177 

Conclusion: The Growth Imperative 189 

Acknowlegments 199 

About the Author 201 


Introduction: Something 
Is Missing 

I
I
n quiet, reflective moments, most of us would acknowledge that there is 
something missing from our lives, something half finished, something 
envisioned but never realized. This something usually relates to a disconnect 
between who we are and what we do, between what we want and 
what we have, or between what we set out to do and what we achieve. We 
sense that we are underachieving relative to our potential and promise. 
One constant reminder of this failure is our inability to set and meet goals 
consistently, to make good on our resolutions, and to keep our promises 
and commitments to ourselves as well as others. 

First, let me ask you three sets of questions: 

1. Do you set goals? Do you write them down and read them 
frequently? Do you achieve many, if not most, of your goals? 
If you struggle to achieve your goals, then this book is for 
you. 
2. Do you recite affirmations daily? Do you even put them in 
conspicuous places so you see them all the time? If most 
1 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



2 . The DNA of Success 

things that you affirm never become a reality, this book is for 
you. 

3. Do you listen to motivational speakers but don’t stay 
motivated when you are alone? If so, this book is for you. 
Life presents us with more paths to happiness and fulfillment than 
ever—yet millions of us still live unfulfilled lives. We are constantly 
searching for the secret to a life full of happiness, joy, peace, and contentment. 
We accumulate books, tapes, and knowledge—but not wisdom or 
results. We have more degrees, but no greater level of success than before. 
We’ve learned how to make a living, but not a life. We’ve added years to 
life, but not life to years. 

Why is this happening when there is a staggering surplus of information, 
techniques, and methodologies on how to live a rewarding life? There 
are more “experts” than ever before, yet we still wrestle with the same old 
problems. In both our personal and our professional lives, we are exposed 
to a wider diversity of people, ideas, success concepts, and approaches. 
Still, even with all this abundance, something is missing. 

Millions of us search for that something, that secret, that special key 
that will give us joy, but it stays just out of reach. Sadly, many of us look 
in the wrong places to find success, happiness, and contentment, and so we 
become increasingly frustrated. The evidence is everywhere. 

Consider this: 

. Nearly half of all marriages fail. 

. Three of every four working adults are unhappy with their 

current jobs. 

. Credit card debt has soared to nearly eight thousand dollars 

for each cardholder. 

. Drug and alcohol abuse remain high. 

. Americans spend more on legalized gambling than on 

groceries. 

Millions of us seem to be saying, “If only I could change jobs, lose 
weight, earn more money, have a new car, be out of debt, or win the lottery, 
then everything would be okay.” But these things and events aren’t 
the source of happiness. For too long we’ve put too much faith in wrong 
ideas about how we can achieve a life that is joyful and meaningful. As a 
result we are disappointed, disillusioned, and dejected. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Introduction: Something Is Missing 

.


Even when we reach the pinnacle of our careers, we invariably ask, “Is 
that all there is?” We find that the things we worked for—once attained— 
have little meaning. Then we ask, “What’s wrong with me? Why am I not 
happy?” 

What’s wrong is that we are pursuing the wrong objectives, going 
down the wrong paths. 

Televisions, bookstores, radio stations, and newsstands are filled with 
thousands of experts offering the same sound-bite advice on how to attain 
goals. These gurus all seem to share the same recipes for success: a dash 
of psychobabble, a sprinkling of gobbledygook, and a heaping portion of 
positive thinking. The final product resembles a ten-day-old loaf of bread— 
moldy, stale, and indigestible, with no taste or nutritional benefit. No wonder 
that after trying the recipe for weeks, months, or even years, we are unhappy 
and unsatisfied with what we’re finding or the results we’re getting. 

FIVE FLAWED TOOLS FOR SUCCESS 

Many teachers of various success methods have told me that they know 
something is missing because they continually see their students fail, even 
after doing all they are taught to do. 

I have researched all the popular concepts for success and have found 
that these standard success techniques don’t work. 

Goal-Setting 

Goal-setting is the reigning king of all success techniques. For decades 
we have been told that if we simply write down our goals and read them 
daily, somehow we will reach them. My research shows that eight out of 
ten things a person writes on a goal list will never happen. 

Everyone has goals they don’t achieve and many they don’t even 
begin to work on! 

Amazingly, in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, people 
continue to believe that if you write down your goals they will happen-
and if you don’t, they won’t. We have all achieved many things that were 
never committed to a goal list. Writing down a list of goals and expecting 
each to become reality is an exercise in futility and far too often is a negative, 
depressing experience. Goal-setting is not the reason people achieve 
success. Goal-setting is merely an exercise they go through believing, 
wrongly, that the exercise will make them successful. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



4 . The DNA of Success 

How do you feel about yourself when you look at your list of goals 
six months after writing them down and see that most have gone unmet? 
Work on some of them may not even have begun, while work on many 
was started, then stopped. You may have quit in frustration when you realized 
that the goals you set were harder to achieve than you thought they 
would be. So how do you feel about yourself when you see that most of 
your goals never become reality? 

No one ever feels good—let alone great—about the fact that they only 
achieved one or two goals out of ten. When we don’t achieve our goals, 
we tend to redouble our efforts and determine we’ll try harder. Perhaps 
believing our goals were set too high, we lower them, hoping we will now 
be successful. 

Rarely do we consider whether the goal-setting advice was wrong. We 
always assume that the reason for failure lies within ourselves. After all, if 
the experts and gurus said this was the way to succeed, who can argue with 
them? And blindly putting faith and trust in the much-ballyhooed “keys” 
to success invariably leads us to more wasted time, effort, and money. 

Motivational Speakers 

Most motivational speakers, entertaining and enlightening though they 
may be, do not create change in people. After listening to a motivational 
speaker, most people stay motivated for about two days. Clearly these 
speakers can motivate and inspire people with wonderful stories, examples, 
and concepts—but only for a moment in time. Typically they have 
no lasting impact. Never mind that some of their advice is ridiculous. 
For example, one speaker says that if you want to stop procrastinating, 
you should note that assignments are due a couple of days before they 
are really due. This is like setting your watch ahead ten minutes, hoping 
to arrive on time. Motivational speakers may entertain and inspire us 
and make us believe we can do anything, but once we go home and the 
excitement dies down, the energy dissipates and we are right back where 
we started. 

One young man attended a motivational rally where a speaker espoused 
ways to make a marriage work. The young man was excited to get this 
information because he was unhappy in his marriage. He took copious 
notes. Two weeks later I asked him how those techniques he had learned 
were working. He replied sheepishly, “I haven’t done anything yet. I’ve 
been too busy.” One month later, I asked him again if the information had 
helped his marriage. He said, “I haven’t applied it yet.” 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Introduction: Something Is Missing 

.


So why do so many of us keep going back to these speakers? Perhaps 
because we find it exciting to be around our gurus—we become fans, motivational 
junkies and groupies. Many of us pay huge sums of money for 
additional courses, even though they give us only a temporary emotional 
high. We keep hoping that the next session we attend will be the one that 
finally gives us what we need to be successful. 

Self-Help Books, Tapes, and Seminars 

Many people have shelves and shelves of self-help books and tapes and 
supplement these by attending live seminars and workshops. For the most 
part, these products and events contain great information and valuable 
insights. However, most self-help books in our libraries become expensive 
dust collectors. And much of what we hear in seminars is forgotten within 
days—if not hours—and never applied. 

Affirmation, Visualization, and Subliminal Messaging 

Many authors and speakers tout affirmations, visualization, and subliminal 
messaging as important ways to achieve our goals. We are told 
that if we repeat positive statements over and over again, they will 
come to pass simply because we have said them aloud. Proponents 
of daily affirmations instruct us to say things like, “I have a happy 
marriage,” “I earn eighty-thousand dollars a year,” “My mortgage is 
paid off,” and “I am out of debt.” If these are not already realities, 
then what are they? They are lies. The truth may well be that you are 
overweight, drive a 1989 Chevy Impala, live in a house mortgaged to 
the hilt, have eight thousand dollars in credit card debt, and are in an 
unhappy marriage. 

Success coaches say that your subconscious cannot distinguish 
between the truth and a lie, so you might as well tell it a lie if it sounds 
better, because your subconscious ultimately controls you. I don’t know 
if the subconscious knows the difference between the 
truth and a lie, but I know the conscious mind knows 
the difference. 

Your conscious 
mind gives you the

There was a time in my life when I sat with closed 

ability to choose,

eyes and visualized things I wanted for hours at a 

and choice is what

time. I had visualization down. I could visualize the 

controls you, your

Mercedes I wanted in great detail. I knew what the 

circumstances, and

dashboard and upholstery looked like, not to mention 

your destiny. 

the exterior color, rims, and tires. I could even smell 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



6 . The DNA of Success 

the newness! I visualized all the things I wanted, and yet I never got them. 
These mental exercises may feel good, but they don’t bring results. 

Another popular concept, subliminal messaging, involves listening to 
ocean waves or the sound of rainfall while subconsciously being bombarded 
with positive messages, suggestions, and affirmations. Does subliminal 
messaging work? Maybe, but only if it involves something you 
really want. Subliminal tapes cannot make you do something you don’t 
want to do. 

If your boss wants you to meet a sales quota but you really don’t want 
to do what is required, all the daily affirmations, visualizations, and subliminal 
messaging in the world won’t bring it about. 

Enthusiasm, Passion, Positivism, and Discipline Can’t 
Stand Alone 

Most motivational experts tell you that you must be enthusiastic, passionate, 
positive, and disciplined to become successful. You do need all these 
qualities, and there is no doubt that they are important. But if you don’t 
have the right direction, you are simply treading water. 

As you come to understand the DNA of success, you will discard these 
and other methods that aren’t working for you now—and never will— 
because they are based on false paradigms of success. Am I bucking the 
system when I disagree with the standard success concepts that have been 
espoused for decades? Absolutely! I’m saying that there is a better way. 
Success is not out there in some technique or methodology—it is an inside 
job. Success comes from within. 

That hunger for success in all of us drives a multibillion-dollar industry. 
But even with all the self-help methods available to us, we are still left 
hungry for success. We’ve bought into some strange things, to the tune of 
$1,145 per consumer a year on personal development products, hoping 
they will be what we need. But we are looking for success in all the wrong 
places. Let’s stop wasting time, money, and energy, and start seeing the 
true source of all success. 

I encourage you to look inside yourself and discover what you truly 
desire. Find all the wonderful things you’ve always wanted, and start 
achieving ultimate success—today! 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Introduction: Something Is Missing 

.


SUGGESTED RESOURCES 

Success & Achievement 

How To Use The Conquering Force Within You—This 8-session personal 
development course shows you how to discover the inner key to achieve success 
in your life. I shatter conventional self-help theories and techniques that well-
meaning Self-Help Guru’s have been telling you for the past 75 years. What’s 
the GOOD news? When we are finished you will have a simple, never before 
revealed, step-by-step blueprint of how to achieve exactly what you want in life 
and the true cause for success in life—including making more money, complete 
time freedom, unshakeable confidence, success in your job, business or whatever 
you desire—and it’s easier then you think. 

It goes into detail about the foundation for all success and achievement. It 
also shows you how to: 

• Tap into your own limitless source of true inspiration and self-motivation. 
• How to isolate the single, root cause of all success. 
• Zero in on the automatic mechanism that will propel you into sustained, 
perpetual, proper action, focus and excitement. 
• How to finally stop wasting your time and money on concepts that just 
don’t work. 
• Empower you with the knowledge and ability to overcome stubborn obstacles 
like fear, stress, lack of money and procrastination once and for all. 
What would your life be like if you could overcome those obstacles? 

For more information on this resource, as well as a FREE special report 
entitled, “If Goal Setting, Positive Thinking, Affirmations, Self-Talk, Dream 
Building, Visualizations, Chanting, Fire Walking and Ever Other Technique That 
Self-Help Guru’s Preach Actually Work… Then Why Are They Failing Miserably 
For You?” [Click here to read the report]. 

The DNA of Success—This is the 210 page hardcover book endorsed by Mark 
Victor Hansen, Jay Abraham, Brian Tracy, Reverend Robert Schuller, Norman 
Vincent Peale, Coach Lou Holtz and others. In this breakthrough book that Jack 
Canfield, co-author of the #1 New York Times bestselling Chicken Soup for the 
Soul, said, “A masterpiece about the true cause of achievement” you’ll find out 
what it really takes to be successful... and it’s NOT what you have been told! It’s a 
breakthrough in personal success. It’s packed full of powerful, moving stories and 
real life examples you can learn from and apply to your very own life to achieve 
the things you really want out of life. To find more about knowing what you 
want… to get what you want [click here]. This is not the e-book version, this is 
a hardcover book. 

The Zufelt Experience—The two and a half day event that has already dramatically 
changed lives! The question is, are YOU next? If You’ve Got The Guts 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



8 . The DNA of Success 

To Change Your Life Forever, I’ll Show You How To Skip The Hard Part of 
Becoming Successful... And, Overnight, Become A Peak Performer Guaranteed! 

To find out more about The Zufelt Experience and how it can change your 
life [click here]. 

Network Marketing Training 

Learn To Earn—How To Make $100,000+ A Year In MLM—You receive 4 
hours of the most affordable, intense, results producing MLM coaching you’ve 
ever experienced... This is NOT the standard fare—it is refreshingly different. I 
help you eliminate every roadblock, challenge and problem you have that’s holding 
you back from achieving the success you so strongly desire in your MLM 
business. To read more about this business building training resource [click 
here]. 

The DNA of MLM Success Video Series—An incredible 6+ hours of the most 
intimate, intense, results producing MLM mentoring and coaching you have ever 
experienced. These videos are like having me sitting in your living room personally 
giving you more than 6 hours of personal one-on-one training. It’s like a 
network marketing brain dump from me to you! 

Here’s what one of Tahitian Noni’s top producers had to say… “Wow! In my 
25 years in the network marketing industry I have never been exposed to such 
potent, effective, no holds barred training. Zufelt’s done it again. The DNA of 
MLM Success Video Series ties everything together you must do to be successful 
in this business! You’ve got to get this for yourself and your downline if you 
want your business to grow.” —Doug Susol, Diamond Pearl Elite (highest level), 
Tahitian Noni 

Following the mentoring I give you in this training series, you will be well 
on your way to become one of the top producers in your organization, and you’ll 
have a sense of purpose, focused effort, and personal passion. For more information 
on this video training series [click here]. 

Zufelt Inner Circle—This is a community of support, training and mentoring for 
individuals in the network marketing industry. I know from personal experience 
you need concrete steps and specific directions to take and build your business 
for maximum profits with minimum time and money. You need to know what 
is working NOW! Not what worked five years ago, two years ago, or even one 
year ago. It’s my desire to take you and every member of the Zufelt Inner Circle 
to a new level of thinking about your business and yourself. To give you a 
new understanding of the untapped potential your business has, as well as a new 
excitement about the growth your business can accomplish. To find out about 
membership in this exclusive community [click here]. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



PART 1 



Core Desires 


http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



1 1 
Success Springs from 
Desire 

Success is not the key to happiness. Happiness 
is the key to success. If you love what you are 
doing you will be successful. 

—ALBERT SCHWEITZER 

S
S
uccess is not found somewhere out there—success resides inside, 
for each of us. You already have what it takes to succeed in life. You 
were born with all you need. Your birth certificate doesn’t come 
with any guarantees of success, but when you were born you came fully 
equipped with talents, abilities, desires, and choices. As you grow and 
progress through every stage of life, you discover that there are things you 
really want—things you now have your heart set on. As you identify those 
things and make wise choices, your success is assured. 

This book will give you a new paradigm for 
what it takes to achieve. A paradigm is a way of 
seeing something—a viewpoint from which you 
operate. When you embrace a new paradigm, it will 
cause you to experience quantum leaps of growth 
and achievement in all areas of your life. With this 
new understanding, you will move forward confidently 
and quickly, creating the kind of life experiences 
you want—and deserve. You will leave behind 
all the wrong paradigms and incorrect concepts you 

“If you want to make 
small, incremental 
improvements, work 
on your behavior. If 
you want to make 
quantum leaps in 
improvement, work 
on your paradigms.” 

—Stephen R. Covey 

11 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 


12 
. The DNA of Success 

thought were keys to success but that in fact caused you to fail. 

WHY WE FAIL 

For years I have researched the reasons people succeed and why they fail. 
In our quest for achievement, we typically make the same mistakes, over 
and over again. 

. 
We don’t know what we truly want. 

We live in a wonderful time when we can be, do, and have whatever 
we want. So why do so many of us still struggle to achieve the things we 
want in life? I believe the primary reason is that most of us, regardless of 
our age, simply do not know what we really, truly want—we only think we 
know. It’s very easy for us to know what we don’t want. It’s another matter 
entirely for us to know what we do want. 

. 
We buy into conventional success methodologies and self-help 
thinking. 

We believe that setting goals, affirming goals, visualizing results, listening 
to motivational speakers, and reading self-help books are the answer. 
We think that the exercise of writing goals will somehow help bring them 
about. But the reason we don’t achieve most goals is that they are not our 
true desires but merely things that we mistakenly think we want. So we set 
goals that aren’t real to us and start moving down a wrong path. We continue 
to put our faith, money, and time into success techniques and technologies 
without realizing that they can’t make us successful. Not only do 
these things not work, but they also create negative feelings. 

. 
We fail to seek or utilize qualified mentors. 

We listen to the wrong experts—to people whose knowledge, experience, 
and ability are not aligned with our wants, needs, and desires. Most 
of these advisers are well intentioned, but they don’t know or understand 
us. They only presume—perhaps based on proximity, intimacy, or psychological 
assessment—to know what’s best for us . 

. 
We expect too much too soon. 

We expect dramatic, short-term results or perfection from ourselves 
when we most need to be thrilled with any progress. Hot-air promotions 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


that promise “fast,” “instant,” “free,” “easy,” and “dramatic” results often 
inflate our expectations. Almost every product is sold with a guarantee or 
promise that in ten, thirty, sixty, or ninety days, we will have our desired 
result. The popularity of cosmetic surgery suggests that many people don’t 
want to wait even thirty days for results, especially if it means submitting 
to any real discipline. 

. 
We fail to seek feedback and make course corrections. 

Pride so often precedes a fall because we simply won’t seek objective 
feedback, ask for help, or make adjustments, opting instead to keep 
going until we hit a brick wall or have some other traumatic wake-up 
call. Then it is either too late to make a change, or very expensive, or 
both. 

. 
We focus more on what we lack than on the strengths, assets, and 
resources we possess. 

When we habitually compare ourselves with others who are allegedly 
the models of how we should look, act, think, or feel, we tend to see all 
that we are not. We see only our deficits and weaknesses—and if we can’t 
see them, others are often very eager to point them out. We lack faith and 
confidence in our ability to learn, grow, change, and become whatever it 
takes to achieve our desires. Our doubts destroy our faith and lead to disillusionment 
and despair. 

. 
We procrastinate and succumb to the paralysis of analysis. 

When we are intimidated by the enormity of a task—or the reality of 
a risk—we tend to do nothing but endless and pointless analysis, or at best 
we make an energetic but futile first attempt. 

. 
We move forward without a plan or strategy and then quit too soon. 

Taking improper action makes it easy to be distracted and hard to 
maintain focus on what we need to be doing. Having no plan or strategy 
makes every obstacle appear overwhelming and impassable. We often 
stop at the first sign of difficulty, whereas had we gone on a little longer 
and exercised a little more persistence, patience, or perseverance, we 
would have attained the prize. When we can’t see the end of the tunnel, 
we tend to think that our current condition or circumstance is a permanent 
state—or that the light we do see is only the light of an oncoming 
train. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



14 . The DNA of Success 

How many times have you tried a product, plan, 

“Good thoughts are 

program, or prescribed remedy for a period of time 

no better than good 

without experiencing the success promised? When 

dreams, unless 

we don’t achieve the promised success, we often 

they are executed.” 

—Ralph Waldo begin to doubt ourselves. We think we don’t have 

Emerson what it takes, that there is something wrong with us. 

Worse yet, we may see ourselves as failures. 

Then what do we do? Far too often we jump back 
in and reapply ourselves to the same techniques that failed us before—only 
this time we “try harder.” We keep repeating this cycle. We remain stuck 
in a continuous, self-defeating cycle of effort, then failure, because we 
embrace a paradigm of success that simply doesn’t work. 

Incorrect assumptions are the foundation upon which many self-help 
theories and practices are established. And so we see many people climbing 
prescribed mountains, only to discover that they don’t really want to 
be on that mountain at all. For them, the climb is always difficult, never 
fun, and at some point they say, “It’s not worth it to me,” and quit climbing. 
Perhaps for them the thought of reaching the top was just a whim, a 
wish, a fantasy, or a dream. But your desires will only be fulfilled if they 
are things you really want to do or become. 

Once you discover what it really takes to experience success, happiness, 
peace of mind, and joy—once you discover the true source of success 
in all areas of your life—self-motivation becomes automatic. You 
will let go of all the techniques and methods you have been taught about 
success. 

For example, I stopped setting goals many years ago, and I still 
achieve everything I want and at a very high level of satisfaction and 
joy—in all areas of my life. Once you learn the source of all success, you 
can, too. Everything I have accomplished, I have done without setting 
any goals. 

Goal-setting experts who tell us to shoot for the moon because even 
if we miss we’ll still hit a star ought to be told, “We don’t want a star. 
We want the moon!” What if our Apollo astronauts were these types 
of goal setters who ended up missing the moon and settling for some 
star? 

Why should we settle for less in our lives when we can learn a better 
way to have what we most desire? By accepting a star instead of the 
moon, we are being told to settle for less. Settling for less is simply not 
acceptable. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


THE SOURCE OF ALL SUCCESS 


There is a better way to achieve the success you want—a way that is simple 
and easy to understand because it is basic to your soul; in fact, it is the 
DNA of all success. It is the way people have achieved success from the 
beginning of time. It worked before there were self-help experts, it still 
works today, and it will continue to work in the future. It is the building 
block upon which all success is built. 

Just as DNA is the chemical basis for all heredity, the DNA of success 
is something we all possess. This DNA of success has been with us 
the whole time. It is the cause of everything that anyone has ever done or 
will ever do. Because of it, the pyramids were built, new countries were 
discovered, men learned to fly and then walk on the moon. It is the cause 
of millions of other successes less dramatic, such as learning to drive a car, 
run a marathon, or shoot par golf. 

To accomplish what you want in life with any measure of satisfaction, 
you must identify accurately what it is you really hunger for. If you were 
lost in a desert, you would soon become hot and thirsty. You would do just 
about anything to get a drink of cool, clear water. This overpowering thirst 
is what I call a Core Desire. 

Identifying and then wisely, faithfully pursuing your Core Desire is 
the one success concept that works every time. This is how people have 
created success for centuries—whether or not they were aware of it at the 
time. Any time you succeed, you tap into this intrinsic motivation and 
internal power. 

You don’t have to write down a list of goals to achieve your aims 
in life. Basketball star Michael Jordan is just one example of someone 
who did not set written goals and still achieved greatness. In his 
article “In Pursuit of Excellence,” he writes: “I have the desire to be 
the best person and player I can become, but I approach everything 
step by step. It’s all mental for me. I never write anything down. I 
just concentrate on the next step. I envision what kind of person and 
player I want to become, and I approach it with that end in mind. I 
know exactly where I want to go, and I focus on getting there. As I 
reach that level, I gain a little more confidence. Each success leads to 
the next one.” 

Michael Jordan first focused on his Core Desire, and then he looked 
for coaches and mentors who could help him. When he achieved one Core 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



16 
. The DNA of Success 

Desire, he moved on, often with the help of mentors. “I’m not afraid to ask 
anybody (who can teach me something) anything. My attitude is ‘Show 
me, help me, give me direction.’’’ 

A
A
ll success is a result of four basic concepts: 

. 
First, accurately identify your Core Desires. 

Core Desires are those things you want so badly that you will do, or 
become, whatever it takes to get them—no matter how hard it is or what 
the risk. These Core Desires are things that your heart is set on—things 
you want with all your heart. 

. 
Second, unleash a powerful force that lies within you—the Conquering 
Force. 

With this force, fueled by passion, you can conquer all obstacles in 
your way. Without it, you will most likely give in or give up. 

. 
Next, find a teacher, mentor, or coach to help you realize your Core 
Desires and focus your Conquering Force. 

Without such assistance, especially in the beginning, you may not gain 
the knowledge, master the skills, or be able to endure hardships and setbacks 
along the way. 

. 
Finally, apply the Conquering Force to different areas of your life to 
make improvements or overcome challenges. 

You will move from one Core Desire to the next in order to learn and 
experience growth, improvement, progress, and positive change. You will 
become a more balanced person with the capacity to achieve and sustain 
success. 

If you seriously want something you will get it—it is only a matter 

“If you do not get 
what you want, it is 
a sure sign that you 
did not seriously 
want it.” 

—Rudyard Kipling 

of time. When you achieve one Core Desire, you 
ask, “What’s next?” You discover and start pursuing 
another Core Desire. 

These steps make the DNA strands of our success. 
You can start taking these steps today. You are 
never too young or too old to begin moving closer to 
what your heart most desires. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


A PERSONAL STORY 


Like Michael Jordan, I have achieved everything important in my life and 
work without any goal-setting. I never wrote down that I would be a professional 
speaker or author of a book. 

My background would suggest that what I have accomplished in life 
is impossible. I was raised on the Navajo Indian reservation. I was the 
only Caucasian boy in my high school senior class, and most of my peers 
didn’t like me because of the color of my skin—and because of what the 
bilagonas 
(white men) did to their ancestors. They held an inherent anger 
toward me, and I was bullied almost every day. 

Each day, school would let out at four in the afternoon. At three-fifty 
every day, my heart started pounding and I knew what would happen next. 
As soon as school let out, my classmates chased me, and if I got caught, I 
got beat up. Recess and gym classes were dangerous times for me—from 
the time I was eight years old until I was sixteen, I lived in constant fear. At 
the end of every school day I would ask the teacher if I could leave early 
and get a head start home. Knowing the situation, the teachers usually let 
me out early. 

One day, when I was ten years old and still in grade school, a boy my 
age put gum in my hair and slugged me in the mouth. I went home with 
a fat lip, bleeding and crying. My mother took me to my father, who was 
working in the trading post less than a block away. My father believed that 
if I fought back, the bullies would leave me alone. So he put me in the car 
and drove me to where the boy lived. 

When my classmate saw me with my dad, he ran away. My father 
chased him down and stood him directly in front of me. My dad then tried 
to make me hit him. “Slug him,” my dad said. “Hit him back!” The boy put 
up his fists in a boxing pose, getting ready to fight. 

I refused to hit him. I just stood there with my hands at my sides, crying. 
I don’t know all the reasons why I didn’t fight back, but I knew I was 
simply terrified. My father tried another tactic—fear motivation. He said, 
“If you don’t hit him, I’ll give you a whipping.” Still I would not hit the 
boy, and in the end I got that whipping. 

Finally my father got angry and shoved me into the car. As he walked 
around to his side of the car, I heard him mutter, “I can’t believe I have 
a coward for a son!” I can still recall these heart-rending words. He said 
it with such disgust and disappointment that I grasped how upset he was 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



18 . The DNA of Success 

with me, and I was sure he didn’t like me. 

I was a coward, and I knew it. My father knew it, too. Everyone knew 
it. I was teased, taunted, and mercilessly ridiculed. And I thought my father 
was ashamed of me. For years I lived in fear and shame. 

School was never a good experience for me. I did poorly, and my 
grades were terrible. I was trying to appear okay—to be funny, to fit in 
some way—so I mouthed off a lot. I got into a lot of trouble with the teachers, 
several of them making it clear that they didn’t like me. My teachers 
said things like, “You are such a loser,” “You’ll never amount to much,” 
“How can you be so dumb?” I was sent to the principal’s office, and in 
those days of corporal punishment, I frequently got bent over his desk and 
paddled with a board. 

When I left high school I was convinced that I was dumb and a loser. I 
understood hardly any math. I just couldn’t grasp one concept before they 
went on to another. I never considered going to college, telling myself, 
“I’m not about to pay money to go through that torture again.” My self-
esteem was nonexistent. 

When I was nineteen, I took a job as a milkman, and quickly found I 
hated it. I gave notice shortly thereafter that I was quitting. But my boss at 
the dairy really liked me and offered me the chance to work at his karate 
studio as the manager. He offered me a salary and told me that he would 
teach me how to do the job. And he would teach me all the karate I wanted 
to learn—for free! 

For years I had lived in fear of being beat up and had suffered the 
shame of being a coward; so when this opportunity presented itself, I 
didn’t have to think about it. I said yes! 

I threw my heart and soul into karate. For eight years, that is basically 
all I did. I had an intense Core Desire to defend myself and regain 
my self-esteem. No one would hurt me again, and I wasn’t going to be 
a coward anymore! I was driven from within to never again be afraid of 
any person, to get back at those bullies, and most importantly, to win my 
father’s respect. 

My Core Desire was so powerful that I achieved many of the fighting 
skills of a black belt. Because I was driven from within to learn to fight, I 
became very good, and I was taught by some of the nation’s top fighters. 

I loved every minute of it. I was injured many times—I had my nose 
broken twice, I jammed and sprained nearly every finger on both hands, 
I broke my left wrist, several toes, badly bruised my shins, and received 
many fat lips—but I persevered. Did I love the pain? No! But because this 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


was a genuine Core Desire, I never quit. This is the awesome, never-quit 
attitude that Core Desires bring with them. It’s automatic. 

I even entered a tournament with a broken wrist. I went to my karate 
teacher—a seventh degree black belt and world champion—and told him 
that I wanted to fight but that I was injured. He asked, “How bad do you 
want to be in the tournament?” 

“Very bad,” I responded. 

“Then do it. You have other weapons. You have two feet and another 
fist with which to fight. Go in there and do your best.” And so I did, and 
I lost, but I began to earn the reputation I longed for—that of being one 
tough guy. 

Now that I am older, I know that fighting wasn’t my Core Desire. 

My Core Desire was to not be afraid or be called a coward anymore, 
to win back my own self-respect as well as the respect of my father. I also 
found another Core Desire: I wanted to be noticed and looked up to—not 
just to win fights. 

I had no talent, no self-esteem, and no athletic prowess that would 
suggest I could do what I did or become what I have become, but I did. 
How can that be? Without understanding it at the time, I had tapped into 
the energy and passion of a Core Desire and had refused to let my past 
determine my future. 

GRATIFICATION IN ACTION 

Most people want instant gratification. The good news is that when you’re 
pursuing genuine Core Desires, in most cases you experience constant 
gratification. You don’t have to wait to have fun or joy when you are on 
the path leading toward your genuine Core Desire. 

Having a life in which everything you do is driven by Core Desires— 
things you love to do or be—is the most satisfying and fulfilling way to 
live. When you embark on the journey to identify your Core Desires, you 
will open up to a new way of living—a life where everything you ever 
wanted will be available to you or you will be on the path toward it, and 
loving every minute of it. 

You can enjoy that great feeling in every area of your life—going 
through life working on things you really, truly love or want. There are 
always the “have-tos” to get to your “want-tos,” your Core Desires. If 
you are dedicated to losing weight or getting in shape, you know you 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



20 . The DNA of Success 

must exercise, but you don’t mind this, even if it is hard. Only when 
your “have-tos” lead to an end result that isn’t a Core Desire are you 
unhappy. 

Core Desires inspire action. Throughout history, great leaders have rallied 
others to their causes, inspired people to accept risks and take action, 
by tapping into their Core Desires. American revolutionary Patrick Henry 
revealed his Core Desire for freedom in his famous statement, “give me 
liberty, or give me death.” Most colonists shared that Core Desire. They 
felt oppressed and wanted to overthrow the oppressor. The closer a leader’s 
vision corresponds with his or her followers’ Core Desires, the greater 
and more powerful the leader becomes. 

Leaders have followings because they tap into people’s Core Desires. 
When leaders fail to tap into their constituents’ Core Desires, their popularity 
and influence wane. Smart leaders first learn what their constituents 
want and then adopt those concepts as their own. Once they know the 
people’s Core Desires, they can promise to help them get what they want. 

Most things that are worth achieving require that you put forth great 
effort. Usually the more worthwhile your desire is, the more effort it will 
require. You won’t put forth all that effort unless you are pursuing a true 
Core Desire. 

There may be many things you have to do to get to your “want-tos.” 

To become a doctor, for example, you have to graduate from college 
and then from medical school. But if you really want to become a doctor, 
you don’t mind that the path is hard, long, and expensive. Imagine going to 
college just because it’s what your parents want for you. Imagine working 
at a job that you hate just to get a paycheck that can’t support the lifestyle 
you desire. Imagine becoming a respected professional who earns a lofty 
income and yet, after years of practice, feels stuck in a rut or caught in a 
downward spiral, wondering, “If I am doing so good, why do I still feel so 
bad?” That crisis of meaning often hits after we have experienced some 
initial success. 

Bruce Jenner seemed to have it all. He was the 1976 Olympic decathlon 
champion who seemed too All-American to be true. He was the man 
on the Wheaties box and on the cover of Sports Illustrated. But in 1980, 
by his own account, you would never have recognized him. 

I was living in the hills outside of Los Angeles, in a one-bedroom 

bungalow—where the dirty dishes filled the kitchen sink and a 

dried-out Christmas tree from the holidays four months ago sat in 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


a clump beside the door—serving as the only attempt at interior 
decoration. I’d lost between fifteen and twenty pounds and years 
of physical inactivity had left me looking thin. I probably needed a 
haircut, but living alone with nobody to talk to, I would have been 
the last to know. I had just celebrated my fortieth birthday, and I 
desperately needed help. I’d lost all direction in life. I’d lost interest 
in business, and after two bad marriages, I didn’t even want to 
think about dating. My self-esteem wasn’t exactly soaring. In fact, 
I thought I was so unattractive that I spent thousands of dollars 
I didn’t have on a nose job, only to have the surgeon botch it so 
badly he had to do it all over again. 

Between personal appearances, my life consisted mostly of 
golf and learning to playa rented piano—I had lots of idle time. 
I had $200 in the bank, and almost $500,000 in debts. My main 
source of income was talking about the Games—about how I once 
was a winner, the man proclaimed the World’s Greatest Athlete— 
while valiantly not letting on how much, and how long, I’d been 
losing. For somebody who’d won so much professionally, it was 
amazing how much I was suffering personally. I hoped that nobody 
could see the defeat and loneliness. 

In many ways, I was still the dyslexic kid who lived in fear 
of being called to get up in front of the class and read. I was right 
back where I started: stripped of self-esteem, doubting my abilities 
to make intelligent decisions, and failing in every area of my 
life. 

I had grown accustomed to a life without—without intimacy, 
without excitement, without adventure, without growth. I was 
broken as a man. And my medal, the golden symbol of all that I 
had won, sat in a drawer, now the symbol of how much I’d lost. 

I had given up. I had lost my will. But once I hit bottom, 
I remembered someone from my past: the champion who lives 
inside each of us, the champion with the capacity to stand before 
the world in victory. This champion would no longer allow me to 
live this lifestyle. I saw light at the end of the tunnel and I realized 
that I could turn my life around and start anew with a clean slate. 
I was reintroduced to the power that I had experienced, but never 
understood, so many years before at the Olympic Games. It was 
a power that would drive me back to the top. It was the power of 
the champion within, and this power lies deep within each of us. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



22 . The DNA of Success 

Inside of us, a champion is waiting, ready to rise and radically 
transform every aspect of our existence. I wanted to become the 
best person, husband, father, businessman, and contributor that I 
could become. 

My life has since blossomed with an amazing ferocity; it was 
like the angels arrived, the skies parted, and the seas split, allowing 
me to run through. I have taken my gold medal out of my sock 
drawer and proudly mounted it upon the wall, allowing it to shine 
brightly in every area of my life. 

For the first time in my life, I know what love means. I thought 
that it was something unattainable, something that I didn’t deserve. 
Now I know that it is the seed from which all great things grow. I 
have discovered that our performance in life is a direct reflection 
of the image we have of ourselves. 

Now, I look as good as I feel. I get up every morning eager to 
tackle my day. From loving my wife to having a meaningful relationship 
with my kids, to being totally fulfilled in business—life 
has never been better. 

Now I’m not merely in touch with my body but also my heart. 
And when those two feelings meet, a combustible reaction occurs, 
allowing me to enter a realm I never thought possible. Somewhere 
out there, your stadium is waiting, filled with the people you love. 
They are rooting for you as you struggle, and they’ll be cheering 
as you finally come around the backstretch and finish as a 
champion. 

Jenner’s life turned around almost at the instant he identified his 
Core Desires. Your life can also change for the better when you focus on 
your Core Desires. You can change your major so you can start enjoying 
college; you can change your job and start doing something that really 
appeals to you; you can embark on a new career pursuing what you really 
want to do and earn just as much or more money in the process. Even if 
you have to take a pay cut to change fields and pursue your dreams, you 
will be glad you made the move. You can do whatever you set your heart 
and mind to do. 

B
B
onnie St. John Deane grew up in hospitals, in leg braces, and on the 
wrong side of the tracks, but that didn’t stop her from believing that an 
African-American girl, with only one leg, could learn to ski. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


As soon as I learned to ski a little, I set my sights on qualifying 
to compete in the 1984 Disabled Olympics in Innsbruck, Austria. 
Such an outrageous dream made me stand taller just thinking 
about it. 

My big break came when an elite ski academy in Vermont 
accepted me as a student. For three months, I searched for grants, 
scholarships, and sponsors to no avail. When I told the headmaster 
I couldn’t afford the tuition and had failed to find sponsors, 
he said, “Come anyway.” I knew this opportunity would change 
my life. But then on the first day of the ski school, I broke my 
leg—my real leg—while playing on a skateboard. As the only kid 
at the academy with only one leg, I had wanted so badly to show 
them I could run the obstacle courses, jump rope, and play soccer. 
Instead, walking on crutches with my artificial leg I could barely 
get from my room to dinner without tripping. Being so thoroughly 
inept among a crowd of such superb athletes hurt more than my 
injuries. At night, I cried in my pillow. 

Although the doctor removed my cast after six weeks, my 
luck didn’t improve. A week later, my artificial leg broke in half. 
Even when you think things can’t get any worse, they do. For 
three weeks my new prosthesis roamed the country, lost in the 

U.S. Postal Service. 
Years later, as I stood on the winner’s platform in Innsbruck, 
Austria, with the silver medal around my neck, I could hear the 
National Anthem playing, and see the Stars and Stripes fluttering 
behind me. The desire for that moment had pulled me through all 
the tough times. 

Do you have a powerful desire that captures your heart and 
picks you up when you fall down? Who or what motivates you? 
When I am asked that question, I must answer, “I motivate me.” 
For any project you are working on, you can increase your motivation 
by finding bigger payoffs that have more meaning for you. In 
all cases, “things” are less important than what those things mean 
to you personally. List everything you have ever wanted to have in 
your life: new clothes, vacations, ideal relationships, peak experiences, 
or career accomplishments. Star the items that really excite 
you. Find the deeper meaning. Ask yourself, “Why do I want it?” 
Dig underneath to find the personally compelling reasons. Dig 
down to find out what you want out of life. Like a child, keep 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



24 . The DNA of Success 

asking yourself “why?” If the final answer is “I should,” or “My 
boss wants me to,” scratch it off your list—or change it, expand 
it, and aim higher. Stop underestimating your odds for success, err 
on the side of optimism, spend less time around negative people, 
and learn from people who have done it before you. List your 
resources and act—don’t feel you have to do everything at once. 
You can get there if you do what you love! 

Bonnie’s story didn’t end on the winner’s platform at the Olympics. 

She has since motivated herself to finish degrees from both Harvard 
and Oxford, win a Rhodes Scholarship, win awards as an IBM sales representative, 
and garner high praise as a White House official on the National 
Economic Council. 

Again, it all starts by knowing what you really want. Don’t get trapped 
by your present reality—what you have or how effective you are at the 
moment. People who are immersed in their present realities often think 
they “know the truth,” but they don’t. 

When you find your Core Desires, your emotion needle will go clear 
off the chart. Those are the things you’ll want to focus on. When you truly 
want something, you’ll amaze yourself at what you will do to get it—nothing 
will stop you once you uncover your Core Desires and tap into your 
Conquering Force. 

What you will become, or achieve, will be a direct result of the Core 
Desires you uncover, the mentors you choose to learn from, and the 
choices you make. Successful people invest in themselves through a continuing 
quest for knowledge, understanding, wisdom, and truth. When you 
invest in yourself, be sure you know your Core Desires first. Then you’ll 

“Make no little 
plans; they have no 
magic to stir men’s 
blood.” 

—Daniel Burnham 

see a much greater return on your investment—not 
only in greater satisfaction but also in improved productivity, 
enhanced social relationships, and greater 
earning ability. There’s nothing like learning all you 
can about something you love, your Core Desires. 
Learning about them will start an important chain 
reaction that will work in your behalf. 

http://www.dnaofsuccess.com 



Success Springs from Desire 

.


SUGGESTED RESOURCES 

Success & Achievement 

How To Use The Conquering Force Within You—This 8-session personal 
development course shows you how to discover the inner key to achieve success 
in your life. I shatter conventional self-help theories and techniques that well-
meaning Self-Help Guru’s have been telling you for the past 75 years. What’s 
the GOOD news? When we are finished you will have a simple, never before 
revealed, step-by-step blueprint of how to achieve exactly what you want in life 
and the true cause for success in life—including making more money, complete 
time freedom, unshakeable confidence, success in your job, business or whatever 
you desire—and it’s easier then you think. 

It goes into detail about the foundation for all success and achievement. It 
also shows you how to: 

• Tap into your own limitless source of true inspiration and self-motivation. 
• How to isolate the single, root cause of all success. 
• Zero in on the automatic mechanism that will propel you into sustained, 
perpetual, proper action, focus and excitement. 
• How to finally stop wasting your time and money on concepts that just 
don’t work. 
• Empower you with the knowledge and ability to overcome stubborn obstacles 
like fear, stress, lack of money and procrastination once and for all. 
What would your life be like if you could overcome those obstacles? 

For more information on this resource, as well as a FREE special report 
entitled, “If Goal Setting, Positive Thinking, Affirmations, Self-Talk, Dream 
Building, Visualizations, Chanting, Fire Walking and Ever Other Technique That 
Self-Help Guru’s Preach Actually Work… Then Why Are They Failing Miserably 
For You?” [Click here to read the report]. 

The DNA of Success—This is the 210 page hardcover book endorsed by Mark 
Victor Hansen, Jay Abraham, Brian Tracy, Reverend Robert Schuller, Norman 
Vincent Peale, Coach Lou Holtz and others. In this breakthrough book that Jack 
Canfield, co-author of the #1 New York Times bestselling Chicken Soup for the 
Soul, said, “A masterpiece about the true cause of achievement” you’ll find out 
what it really takes to be successful... and it’s NOT what you have been told! It’s a 
breakthrough in personal success. It’s packed full of powerful, moving stories and 
real life examples you can learn from and apply to your very own life to achieve 
the things you really want out of life. To find more about knowing what you 
want… to get what you want [click here]. This is not the e-book version, this is 
a hardcover book. 

The Zufelt Experience—The two and a half day event that has already dramatically 
changed lives! The question is, are YOU next? If You’ve Got The Guts 
