A Course in Light Speed Reading 

A Return to Natural Intuitive Reading 

Joseph Bennette 

 

 

 



A Course in Light Speed Reading 

A Return to Natural Intuitive Reading 

Joseph Bennette 

A Course in Light Speed Reading 

A Return to Natural Intuitive Reading 

by Joseph Bennette 

First Published 

July 1997 

Fifth Edition 

ISBN 0-9631506-9-4 

© Copyright 2001, Joseph Bennette. No part of this book may be reproduced 
by any means without consent or written permission of the author. The 
views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent 
the views or position of anyone else. No guarantee as to applicability of this 
program is implied or expressed. Ideas, concepts, processes, and techniques 
offered in this book are intended to assist the reader in opening to their own 
intuitive processes and may appear different to each person. However, due to 
the many variables involved, I make no assertion, warranty or guarantee that 
all the information here will work for all people, all the time. 

 

Available from: 

Joseph Bennette 

265 37th Ave SE 

Salem, OR 97301 

joseph@jbennette.com 

www.jbennette.com 

 

 

 


About the Author 

Joseph Bennette holds Master Rapid Eye Technician (MRET) and Reiki 
Master Teacher (RMT) certificates and is listed in the International Registry 
of Rapid Eye Technicians. 

Joseph is a trainer with the Rapid Eye Institute, Salem, OR, and has 
Doctorates in Clinical Hypnotherapy (DCH) from the American Institute of 
Hypnotherapy, Santa Ana, CA, and Psychology (Ph.D.) from American 
Pacific University, Honolulu, HI. He is a board certified hypnotherapist with 
the American Board of Hypnotherapy, Advisor to the Oregon Hypnotherapy 
Association, a member of the Association for Meridian Therapies, The 
Association for Integrative Medicine, and The American Academy of 
Experts in Traumatic Stress. 

Joseph is in private practice in Salem, Oregon. With a wealth of clinical and 
educational experience, he offers successful strategies for positive life 
transformation in a minimum of time, with gentleness and ease. 

Joseph and Carol Bennette live in Salem, Oregon. They have a family of 
nine children, many grandchildren, and a host of friends. 

 

 

What Joseph has to say about The Course 

When I was in second grade I was called upon to read in front of the class. 
The material I was required to read was above my ability at the time and I 
knew it. I was so frightened to stand in front of the class, yet I was unable to 
resist the teacher who was an old-school disciplinarian. The teacher insisted 
that I come up and read in front of the class or receive a severe consequence 
- she liked to strike the backs of hands with a ruler, a very intimidating and 
painful experience. 

I was petrified with fright as I stood before my class, many of whom were 
snickering and giggling. I gave them quite a show when I released my 
bladder in fright. I was so embarrassed, and the teacher so unsympathetic, 
that I swore I’d never do that again. I was traumatized to say the least. I 
never again stood in front of a class - I took the consequences instead. 

Further, I never undertook to read adequately because that meant “proving” 
it to my teachers and classmates in some embarrassing way. So, I went to 
my mother’s mother, my grandma Tuggle. She was a special reading teacher 


for the school district I lived in. She taught me some shortcuts that helped 
me get through. Some of her shortcuts are included in this course because 
they worked so well for me. 

In the mid 1970's I completed the Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics course. 
The concepts of supersonic reading appealed to me having actually 
demonstrated to myself that it could be done. I burst the reading barrier and 
proved to myself that I was not a dummy - I had just learned a system that 
did not work for me. 

Years later, when one of our daughters was nearly gang raped after school 
and our son was beaten into a gang, we pulled our school age children out of 
school (there were 4 then) and determined to teach them at home. I took 
upon myself the task of teaching them how to read, since a person can learn 
just about anything if they know how to read. All the successful tactics I 
used with them I included with this course. 

We did some experimentation with eye patches, reading upside down and 
backwards, and generally having a great time. We also used “shortcuts” and 
“cheating” as one daughter who took the course scolded me - she had been 
taught what was fair and correct in reading. 

After 8 weeks of our course, the oldest daughter, then in her senior year in 
traditional school, was able to demonstrate a reading speed of over 30,000 
words per minute and comprehension level of 95% (from her initial speed of 
120 and comprehension level of 30%). The youngest of our children to take 
this course was then in 8th grade. Her scores were similar - 25,000 words 
per minute and 95% comprehension. They were amazed, yet not surprised. 

As they have gone on with their lives, they have chosen to practice some of 
the skills and have retained much of their skill. 

In this course I offer you the value of my experience in reading. My belief is 
that you already know how to read; you’ve just been conditioned to believe 
that you either can’t read or read slowly. My own experience in second 
grade and on through the public school system has shown me the inadequacy 
of our present system of instruction in reading. Belief in our own innate 
genius might be a wonderful start. 

Thank you for investing in this course. May you experience wonder and awe 
in yourself as you progress. 

In gratitude, 

Joseph Bennette 


A Course in Light-Speed Reading© is based on the fundamental concepts of 
holistic studies. From that point of view, you are already a Light-Speed 
Reader before you begin this course. All you have to do is remember your 
own power. 

A Course in Light-Speed Reading© is a course in recovery of your basic 
intuitive sense of connection and a return to humanity’s natural way of 
communicating - thought (idea) transmission. 

A Course in Light-Speed Reading© is a system of concepts, exercises, and 
processes designed to be enjoyed and utilized in the home environment by 
the whole family or an individual (taught/learned at home). Having a library 
nearby can be useful, too. 

A Course in Light-Speed Reading© includes step-by-step, day-by-day 
activities and exercises for developing Light-Speed Reading skills. Also 
included are exercises and processes designed to enhance your intuitive 
abilities (i.e., extrasensory perception). 

Remember that reading is fun, easy, and an adventure. I believe in you! 

 

Equipment you will need to successfully complete this course: 

1. An eye patch for each participant. A properly fitted eye patch will stand 
away from the eye enough to allow the eye to be open under the patch, 
yet block all or nearly all light. Adequate eye patches may be purchased 
from the Rapid Eye Institute at www.rapideyetechnology.com or 
503_399_1181. 
2. A computer with a data connection to an online service or ISP (if you 
wish to use the online links available in this course). 
3. You will find that Paraliminal audio tapes/CDs will assist you greatly in 
balancing your brain hemispheres and strengthening your learning 
experience. I recommend the “Memory Supercharger” by Paul R. 
Scheele, from Learning Strategies, Corp. at 952_476_9200, or toll free 
800_735_8273, or FAX 952_475_2373 http://www.LearningStrategies.com 


 

 

 


What A Course in Light Speed Reading is and is not: 

Is: 

Is Not: 



 

A basic reading course 

A course for upgrading reading abilities 

Easy to do and learn 

A skill based on innate ability 

Enlightening 

Difficult or complex 

An end-all reading course 

A magic pill 

A replacement for practice 

Enlightenment 

 



 

 


 

Table of Contents 

 

 
Introduction.....................................................................................................7 
Rapid Eye Technology.................................................................................7 
NLP..............................................................................................................8 
Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT).........................................................8 
Home Schooling...........................................................................................9 
Reading........................................................................................................9 
Some Fundamental Philosophies...............................................................10 
The Course....................................................................................................10 
Basic Premises...........................................................................................12 
Some Challenges with Intuitive Reading...................................................20 
What Is Reading?.......................................................................................23 
The Visual Reading Process......................................................................25 
Obstacles....................................................................................................33 
General Supporting Processes......................................................................36 
How to Eye Patch.......................................................................................39 
Emotional First Aid....................................................................................41 
RET (Rapid Eye Technology)®................................................................41 
Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT)®....................................................42 
Mind Machines..........................................................................................44 
Reading the Signs......................................................................................45 
Trusting Myself..........................................................................................46 
Making Up Stories.....................................................................................48 
New Point of Awareness............................................................................51 
Spinning.....................................................................................................52 
Journaling Dreams.....................................................................................52 
Imaging Modes and Goal Setting..............................................................56 
A Course in Light Speed Reading................................................................60 
Course Outline...........................................................................................60 
Daily Schedule of Events..............................................................................61 
How to Read.................................................................................................83 
Reading Technical Material.......................................................................98 
Teaching Children to Read......................................................................100 
Baseline And Forecast................................................................................104 
Baseline Scores........................................................................................104 
End Results Forecast................................................................................104 
Testing Form...............................................................................................105 
Resources....................................................................................................106 

Introduction 

Many years ago, I took a course in speed-reading as part of a college 
program. It was marvelous for me to break the 700 words per minute 
“barrier” and explode into a new world of reading. I found that, for me, 
reading was more of a block or hindrance than an aid to learning. I had to do 
something significantly different so that I could read the huge amount I 
needed to read for my degree. 

My maternal grandmother was a reading teacher during the 1950s and 
1960s. She was the first to introduce me to alternative reading methods, 
including mechanical readers. Her love for reading has been an inspiration to 
me through my life. I love to read and have developed a deep appreciation 
for this wondrous human ability to communicate through the written word. 

Even though my mother and grandmother encouraged me to read, I was not 
a good reader in school. For some reason, I despised reading. I recall being 
embarrassed as a young child. I was called upon to stand in front of the class 
and read out loud. Every other word out of my mouth was “no” or “wrong.” 
I recall having to read sentences twice or more until I got them “right.” 

In my college speed-reading course, I increased my reading speed by a 
factor of three by learning to read sentences only once - rather than going 
back over each sentence twice or more. You can do the same thing. If you 
learned to read out loud to a teacher or class, you may have developed this 
same poor reading habit. 

 

Rapid Eye Technology 

Over the past 15 years, I’ve been involved with Rapid Eye Technology 
(RET) - both practice and training. Early on, I recognized the possibilities 
for RET in the educational arena. RET is a stress relief process that is 
effective and fast. Much of the reason most people have trouble reading is 
their stress about reading out loud in front of judgmental others (a 
“flashback” to childhood reading problems). 

In addition to the emotional and mental processes RET addresses, there is 
also a strong spiritual basis that encourages inner growth and development. I 
suggest that the basis for reading is the same basis that underlies RET. That 
spiritual basis is how you can read at astronomical speeds, beyond your 
wildest dreams or expectations. 


You have within you the ability to read millions of words per minute and 
comprehend it all! 

Now, aside from what you are capable of, you will probably allow yourself 
to read in the thousands of words per minute range. Realistically, readers 
will probably see a substantial rise in both reading speed and 
comprehension. This is the overall goal of the reading course presented here. 
Beyond the reading course, my hope is that you find the spiritual giant 
within you that knows all and understands all. A Course in Light-Speed 
Reading© could be your opening into that wondrous mystical realm. 

 

NLP 

Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) is a powerful process for initiating 
and sustaining successful action. In a nutshell, NLP was originally 
developed after the “monkey-see-monkey-do” philosophy. That is, if you 
can see what someone is doing to achieve success, you can pattern after 
them and achieve success, too. 

There are a number of successful reading strategies involved in this course. 
You will read and follow specific directions based on principles of NLP and 
other tactics of successful speed-readers and speed reading courses. 

In addition to gleaning the most successful processes and techniques from 
many sources, this course includes processes and techniques for opening and 
increasing intuitive functions. 

 

Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT) 

EFT is an emotional healing technique based on the idea that the cause of all 
negative emotions is a disruption in the body’s energy system. EFT tends to 
relieve symptoms by use of a routine of tapping with the fingertips on 
various body locations. This tapping serves to balance energy meridians that 
become disrupted when the client thinks about or becomes involved in an 
emotionally disturbing circumstance. 

EFT was developed by Gary Craig whose academic training includes a 
Stanford engineering degree. He is a Certified Master Practitioner of Neuro-
Linguistic Programming (NLP) and is a Certified Master of The Callahan 
Techniques. Many of the concepts underlying EFT came from Gary’s 
training in Thought Field Therapy (TFT) under the tutorship of Dr. Roger J. 
Callahan. 


 

 

Home Schooling 

A few years ago, we chose to home school our children. We were very 
disappointed with their performance in public school and could not afford to 
send our nine children to a private school. We looked into several home 
school alternatives and were unhappy with all of them. Being very busy 
people, we felt very discouraged and a little disheartened with the idea of 
having to spend significant time schooling our children. 

Fortunately, our time worked out (as time can do when one lets go of the 
need for time) so that we could allot several hours per week to schooling our 
children. Some of our children had moved away, pursuing their own adult 
lives. We were left with four children, all teens, to attend our home school. 

As parents, we were aware that the most important things our children could 
learn at home were not academic. Above all other things, love had to be the 
underlying principle of our school. Further, we recognized how important it 
was that our children learn how to think, rather than know how to do the 
three Rs. We both agreed that imagination and creativity were important in 
the thinking process. 

The oldest of our children to attend our home school was 17 and a senior in 
high school. She chose to withdraw from formal public school to learn at 
home. This was a significant sacrifice on her part. As a popular teenager at 
school, she was convinced that her education was more important to her than 
her popularity. 

We enrolled our 14 and 15-year-old children, too. They were very excited 
about doing school at home. In addition, one of our adult children joined us 
for one semester. The whole experience has been an exciting adventure into 
alternatives and family togetherness. 

 

Reading 

We recognized the importance of reading right away. Because our children 
read poorly, they were at a distinct disadvantage in school and academic 
pursuits. 

We started by investigating several methods of reading and processes for 
learning, including super-learning and NLP methods. All these courses and 


books were useful and effective ideas and presented us with several ideas to 
get us started. 

We investigated ways in which we could incorporate basic Rapid Eye 
Technology processes and techniques to quicken the learning curve. 

 

Some Fundamental Philosophies 

From the standpoint of perception, you are everything you perceive. Because 
you are the one doing the perception from your point of view, you are the 
ultimate authority, the creator or god of your perception. Regardless of what 
may actually occur around you, you are the one who perceives it in your 
way. No one else perceives for you. 

As the one who perceives your world, you have much more control over 
your perceptual dimension than you may think. You can change your mind 
in a flash about anything you can perceive. You hold the key to your Light 
Speed Reading experience. Life in general is the way it is because you 
perceive (believe) it that way. Change your mind and you change your 
world. 

 

You’re only as young as the last time you changed your mind. 

Timothy Leary 

 

 

 

 

The Course 

A Course in Light-Speed Reading is set up to be a four-week experience that 
may take more time according to the readiness and adaptability of those 
taking the course. Included is a course for children. It will take most young 
children little time to catch on to the principles of light-speed reading as the 
parents and teachers support them in their efforts (resist testing their 
comprehension by having them read out loud - just ask what the story was 
about). There is also a program for reading technical material. 

This program is based on a 4-week, 4-day per week, day-by-day plan. Your 
plan may vary according to your needs. However, the plan as outlined here 
has proven successful in its order (time may vary). Day 5 of each week is to 


be used as a day for integration and review. Use this day to relax, let go of 
the learning curve, and allow the learning to sink in. 

Instructions for week 5 are specific to reading technical or scientific 
material. Therefore, for learning how to light-speed read novels, magazine 
articles, and most newspapers, the instruction for the first 4 weeks will be 
sufficient. 

The key to success is intent and commitment. If, for some reason, you find 
yourself digressing (reading at light-speed and feeling that you’re just not 
getting it), relax, breath, and re-commit. The natural learning curve must be 
overcome by continuing undaunted. You are already successful, you just 
have to demonstrate it to yourself with practice and faith. 

The most important thing to do with reading is to enjoy it. No matter 
whether you are reading technical material, children’s books, novels, or 
magazine articles, fun is the most important ingredient in a successful 
reading experience. Relax into your reading and allow the fun to come forth. 

 

 

 


Basic Premises 

Reading is a visual task 

Think about it. You read by seeing the words with your eyes first. The visual 
is then translated into verbal in order to read out loud. Dyslexia is a 
condition where the person is unable to verbalize what he/she sees. This 
condition is minimized in Light Speed Reading because there is no necessity 
to translate visual to verbal. The visual input is directed to the cognitive 
awareness centers instead to create mental images and concepts. These 
concepts and mental images are intuitive processes we all do every day. It’s 
our natural capacity for understanding our world. It is this sense of 
understanding that Light Speed Reading taps into. 

 

Read ideas and concepts 

Reading can be an experience in wholeness. Holistic thinking can speed 
your reading experience. By engaging holistic modalities of the natural 
process of thinking in a reading session, the reader connects with a level of 
awareness that connects with the author in wholeness. 

The reader and the author become one mind and the concepts are translated 
from one person to another rather than the slower method of transliteration, 
which follows the path of a third party (your verbal awareness). By tapping 
directly into the thought process of the author you get a unique perspective: 
that of the original author. 

Transliteration is a little like an exercise I experienced years ago. Two 
people sit back-to-back on the floor (or on a bench). Each has an identical 
stack of children’s building blocks. 

The job of one of the two participants is to build something and with voice 
only, and without looking, get the other person to build what he/she has 
built. So, one participant is building and describing while the other is 
listening only (no speaking) and building from the description given by the 
other. It is an exercise in frustration for many. 

Reading has become an exercise in frustration for many people because they 
don’t have the author there with them to ask questions of. In Light Speed 
Reading the reader simply plugs into their native intuition and converses 
with the author while they read. 

 

Anxiety impedes reading 


For a great many people reading was taught to them in an environment of 
high stress. Forced to read in front of our peers; embarrassed if we made a 
mistake; given bad marks and often shown up in favor of those who looked 
better to the teacher (in school looks were much more important than talent 
or ability [Stanford 1989]). A great deal of stress has therefore been attached 
to our reading experience. Fortunately there are several effective remedies to 
the stress of reading. Here are a few suggestions: 

Eye Patching - If you continue to see life as you have always seen life, you 
will continue to get from life what you have always gotten from life. Until 
you change your basic thought processes about life (including your ability to 
read) you will continue to experience life as you have always done. Patching 
the eyes provides your brain with a new perspective on life. Even for a short 
while, patching can significantly change your perspective and your 
underlying paradigm. 

Rapid Eye Technology - Rapid Eye Technology (RET) is one of the most 
exciting alternative healing methods of this century because it addresses the 
key aspects of mind and body together. RET is the treatment of choice for 
reading anxiety and stress. There are exercises, instructions, and processes 
for RET in this course. 

Emotional Freedom Technique - EFT aligns the meridians to give you a 
boost of energy and align your thoughts and your energy fields. There are 
EFT techniques in this book to assist you in aligning your thought processes 
for maximum benefit and speed. 

Mind Machine. This machine is worth its weight in gold for decreasing 
reading anxiety and increasing reading speed and comprehension. I have 
found that the Voyager used just before bed increases the likelihood of lucid 
dreaming. For some reason unknown to me, the patterns, sound, and light 
change in the eyes and ears of the participant seems to enhance learning and 
comprehension abilities. 

Perhaps enlivening the visual sensory mechanisms of the brain and 
stimulating the learning centers associated with them opens the intuitive, R-
mode, holistic parts of the psyche/mind. In my experience with this program 
for restructuring our reading experience, I think the Voyager is 
indispensable. I believe there is a relationship between visual stimulation 
and increased learning ability with Mind Machines. You can find my 
favorite machines at www.jbennette.com. 


Paraliminal Audio - Paraliminal audio is a strategy devised by Paul R. 
Scheele that produces profound mental relaxation and focus. I highly 
recommend these audio tapes/CDs for balancing brain hemispheres, 
releasing tension, and focusing for recall. I particularly recommend the 
Paraliminal tape/CD, “Memory Supercharger” available from Learning 
Strategies, Corp. www.learningstrategies.com. 

Meditation - Perhaps the most profound changes you will ever make in your 
life will be in those times of stillness when you connect with your Higher 
Self. Through a program of intentional stillness, you can significantly speed 
up the process of incorporating and integrating the Light Speed Reading 
course. There are several very successful and effective meditation processes 
and programs available in your public library. Further information can be 
had from TM (Transcendental Meditation) groups. Check in with your local 
Public Library for assistance. 

Breathing techniques - Breathing is fundamental to human existence. 
Breathing the breath of life is permission to live. So, notice how you breathe 
while you read. Occasionally take in a very deep breath and exhale it all at 
once (like a deep sigh of relief). Do this before you read. Taking in the 
breath of life can also relieve a large amount of your anxiety and doubt 
about reading. I think you will be pleased with what breathing can do for 
your reading experience. 

 

 

Reading is like life 

You don’t have to understand it all - Sometimes you have to let go of 
understanding your life in order to enter the realm of Light Speed. When 
scientists first discovered quantum particles, they were faced with a dilemma 
of monumental proportions: because these tiny particles that make up all 
matter seemed to be nonexistent, what did that say about our existence? 
What’s more, these seemingly nonexistent particles were simultaneously 
existent, too. 

Beyond that complete madness, relationships between particles seemed to 
exist faster than the speed of light. In other words, a particle paired with 
another would exhibit the same behavior as the other even when the two 
particles were large distances apart and shielded from one another. 


Getting past our defense about how long something must take to learn; how 
quickly an idea can be understood, how fast we can take in information, 
opens us to the realm of infinite possibilities. 

There will be times in this course when you will have to give up your 
preconceived ideas about how fast you can read. There will be times when 
you will be coached by this course to sweep through material so fast that you 
will feel convinced that you got nothing out of the material; and you will be 
right, you may get nothing from it. Stay with it, though. It’s just you going 
through your barriers. 

When man discovered flight in the early part of this century (20th century), 
he thought he was up against a barrier, the barrier of air. With faith and 
perseverance, he overcame that barrier and flew, farther and farther, faster 
and faster. 

Later, man believed he was restricted by another barrier, the speed of sound. 
It seemed that when aircraft flew at or near the speed of sound, they would 
rattle and fly apart physically. Finally, someone “broke” that barrier, too, 
and man flew faster than they thought they could. 

It’s like that in our lives, too. We find ourselves face-to-face with a barrier 
and we think we can’t overcome it. Then, with perseverance and work, we 
overcome it and it becomes part of what we can do and no longer in the 
realm of what we can’t do. The same holds for reading. Know that you can 
exceed your self-imposed barrier to Light Speed Reading. 

Reading is fun and an adventure - When you “break” the verbal reading 
barrier an interesting thing happens: your reading material turns into 
“movies of the mind.” Because you can read at such high speeds, the book 
turns into a vivid, 3D, movie. 

Your mind will actually create the scenes, play the soundtracks, and involve 
you in a full sensory experience. Because you no longer have to translate 
your visual experience through the auditory mode (a slower sensory 
function), you free yourself to experience whole-brain, full sensory, intuitive 
fun. 

Minus the anxiety associated with the running of the equipment (the reading 
process), you can sit back, relax, and enjoy the show. And it is usually a fun 
and enjoyable one. 

Beyond the idea of a movie, A Course in Light Speed Reading is intended to 
create in you a “memory” or “knowing” of the material you read. This is a 


deeper sense of the material than just “seeing” it. It is as if you have 
experienced it and have a memory of it. This makes reading retention more 
than merely recalling the material you read. It feels more like recalling 
something you experienced directly. 

Intuitive Reading is natural - It is your native capacity to take in things in 
wholeness. Think of a chair. Did you come up with an image of a whole 
chair or did you imagine all the parts of the chair separately? Initially you 
thought of the whole chair together as one item. As I asked, you may have 
parted out the chair and then imagined it in parts. Still, the first image that 
came to you was the whole chair. You didn’t have to mull it over or talk to 
yourself about it - you just had it. 

For most the image of the chair was a visual image. At the very least, you 
probably had a sense of the chair immediately. Reading can use the same 
mechanism. Once the full capacity of the imagination is put into play, the 
images, ideas, concepts, and stories will come to you before you can even 
speed-read them. 

By the time you get to the end of this course you will probably be able to 
“read” the story before you actually get to the last page of text. Your mind 
will fill in the details intuitively. It’s a little like what happens when you 
point your finger in a direction and say, “It’s over there.” You don’t have to 
extend your finger all the way across the room to the item; the mind fills in 
the line and knows where to look. 

In the course of engaging our intuitive sense, we will take maximum 
advantage of our ability to surmise, to assume. Many of us have been taught 
that it is wrong to assume anything. I have even heard it said that the word 
“ASSUME” makes an “ASS” out of “U” and “ME”. In the process of 
reading (and intuition) assumption is the creative energy that completes the 
bridge between imagination and understanding. 

Our reading history 

Our early experiences with reading were often anxiety filled and guilt-
ridden. We were forced to read out loud in front of others, criticized and 
corrected in public (invalidated and humiliated), made to look stupid or 
slow, then tested to check that we were “right” according to someone else’s 
interpretations. This made making mistakes “wrong”. So we determined not 
to be embarrassed or made wrong by learning how to defend ourselves 
against it. 


Some of us found ways to avoid reading (some of us were very creative in 
our avoidance techniques, too). Some learned how to put on a good face - 
faking it. Maybe we even ran away; escaping into other pursuits and 
interests that excluded reading or didn’t seem to require it. 

If we were “slow” or different we were criticized and/or humiliated. This 
made us the brunt of jokes, labels, and other judgments. For most of us, this 
ridicule and judgment took us to a dislike and anxiety about reading. 

In most schools, reading is taught as a verbal skill. The process of moving 
visual symbols (words on the page) into verbal speech patterns is called 
transliteration. It’s a little like translating Spanish into English one word at a 
time. As you may know, Spanish is structured differently than English so a 
word-by-word transliteration would probably sound pretty funny to one who 
knows the language. 

A simple phrase like “Look at the red ball” in Spanish, would transliterate 
into English something like “Look you at ball red.” The same kind of 
mistranslating occurs between the visual and verbal processes. They just 
don’t speak the same language. 

The old way of reading meant that one must first transliterate the visual 
words on the page into verbal speech patterns and then into visual, verbal, 
and kinesthetic images. When the visual text is placed directly into visual 
images, coupled with an inner “knowingness” the process is substantially 
quickened. This is the process of Light Speed Reading. 

Reading out loud to “check” that we knew the words we read took most of 
us out of our intuition and into our linear verbal sense. Reading became an 
exercise in translation and frustration. Because reading is a visual-imaginary 
process, making it a verbal-mental exercise took us out of our hearts and into 
our heads. 

This migration from heart (intuition) to head (intellectualizing and doubting) 
is one of the fundamental, underlying problems facing our society in general. 
When we think about and analyze instead of feeling, we often miss 
opportunities for real experience and expressions of true connection and 
relationship. Especially in the West it is customary to avoid feeling, 
embarrassing or shaming those who express their feelings openly. We label 
it as some kind of weakness. 

Regardless of what we may think about it, emotions are the gateway to 
intuition and the key to the Light Speed Reading process. When you release 


your shame and guilt, your intuition can come through for you. Then all you 
have to do is trust it. 

Phonics is still the most popular reading methodology - as good as phonics 
is, and as popular as it is, it is still a process of transliteration that slows or 
diminishes the intuitive process. Schools contend that the teacher must hear 
the child read in order to determine that the child has read the material 
correctly. I think that given the opportunity to intuit the story, most children 
will “assume” or intuit the story correctly (at least as they interpret it). 

Following the Light Speed Reading method, children can learn to speed read 
at a very young age with encouragement. It is the judgment of “right” or 
“wrong” that makes the child believe that he or she is “right” or “wrong” 
when they read. The child equates ability with identity and learns to believe 
they are their behaviors. As a culture we perpetuate this illusion in our 
learning institutions with the very fundamental process of reading. 

We learned that words must be read serially, one-after-another (strong left-
brain lean) so they can be heard and understood by the teacher. This bias 
toward serial thinking and away from holistic thinking is obvious in most 
scholastic pursuits. After a lifetime of learning in this way, we begin to 
believe that there is no other way to learn. 

The “one-thing-at-a-time” mentality is useful when doing tasks that require 
attention to detail and order like preparing food from a recipe. When it 
comes to reading, however, the attention to detail and order can become a 
hindrance to the smooth translation of ideas from one person to another (the 
basis of communication). 

To give you a feel of what it is like to make a story out of words without all 
the details consider the following: Cat - mouse - boy - house - garden hose - 
summer. With those words, you can make a story, maybe many stories. It’s 
because your mind fills in the details for you. 

I don’t have to give you the details in order for you to get the images 
necessary to make up a pretty interesting story. You may even come up with 
your own images (an inner show). If I were to tell you that you could take all 
the elements of your story about the cat and mouse and use them randomly 
rather than in the order I gave them to you, you would come up with even 
more possible stories. 

It’s not the order of the words that make the story; it’s the author’s intent 
that makes the story. Intuitively connecting with the author by opening up to 


your native holistic nature will allow your detail-filling mind to do what it 
does best - assume. This will make the show worth the price of admission. 

Verbal reading instills a “what if I make a mistake” mentality (anxiety). This 
anxiety carries on to other facets of life. Ever watchful that we don’t make a 
mistake causes us to be hyper-vigilant about life. This over-protective 
posture invites more opportunities to feel unsafe so we can further engage 
our over-protective postures. It’s a cycle of anxiety-insecurity-safety-hyper-
vigilance. 

Watching always that we stay safe means that our ability to stretch and grow 
diminishes with time. Because we feel afraid we may make a mistake, we 
tend to close down opportunities because we believe they are unsafe. Further 
we seek fewer opportunities for growth and development because they seem 
to offer some degree of risk (the four-letter word that starts with “R”). 

As we release our grip on safety and step into some degree of perceived risk, 
we must open our trust. It is this trust of ourselves that develops true 
character and the ability to do the miraculous. When you no longer worry 
about whether you have it right or not, you may graduate into a larger 
dimension that includes Light Speed living. 

Verbal Reading 

Verbal reading has a speed barrier (about 600-700 words per minute). 
Testing has shown that a person can speak about 600-700 words per minute 
maximum. When a person is taught to read verbally, they can expect to read 
no faster than the 600-700 words per minute barrier. Because reading has 
been taught as a verbal transliteration process, the 600-700-word barrier 
becomes real. 

The belief is that we can only read as fast as we can say the words (after 
transliterating the visual symbols into verbal speech patterns). Once a person 
learns how to take visual symbols (the words on the page) and translate them 
into ideas and concepts directly, the barrier breaks and there is no speed 
barrier to contend with (after all, how fast can you think thoughts). 

Intuitive processes have been discouraged in our society. Until recently, 
we’ve tended to place a cultural taboo on intuition in the West. We 
discourage those who practiced intuitive processes and condemned those 
who believe in it. 

We called people “witch doctors” or “quacks” or “daydreamers” or even 
“devils” for believing or practicing intuitive processes. We really have 


turned things upside-down in the West. Because we have sought to limit 
ourselves to what our senses can feel, we limit our possibilities and our 
abilities. Sometimes the discouragement is subtle or hidden. We seek to 
“prove” intuitive processes when they are beyond proving. 

As you and your family participate in this Light Speed Reading course, a 
significant side benefit might be that you become reacquainted with your 
holistic, feminine, intuitive self. I think the reunion will be a delightful one. 

 

Some Challenges with Intuitive Reading 

In school intuition seems to be too subjective - hard to test objectively. 
Studies at Princeton (Jahn, et.al.) have shown that the mindset of the 
experimenter significantly influences the outcome of any experiment. 

So powerful is our intuitive nature that we actually control the functioning of 
matter with it. Because intuition is a personal thing and easily influenced by 
a myriad of outside influences, schools and the public in general tend to 
steer away from psychic or intuitive processes. 

Reading is one of those intuitive processes that as a culture we have avoided 
or sought to do a different way. It is as though God declared man to be a 
certain way and man said, “Great idea, God, but I think I’ll do it my way, 
thank you.” 

So, here we have a natural intuitive process, reading, taught by man in an 
unnatural way. How like us humans to choose our own way in spite of 
evidence to the contrary. 

I have found that it is possible to objectively test people’s reading speed and 
comprehension. When testing is done, however, the subjective part, the 
interpretation of the images received by the reader, is not subject to testing. 

In school, the testing methods used to “objectively” check to determine if the 
pupil understood those giving the test subjectivize the material. In other 
words, we test our children in reading to determine if they understand the 
passage the same way the teacher (or testing agency) does. 

It’s ridiculous to assume that because the school board or teacher 
understands a passage of material one way, that everyone who reads it 
thereafter must understand it the same way. Our world is too full of 
ambiguity to say that any two people must understand anything the same 
way. 


Take for example the statement: “People know me as Fred.” When someone 
says that to you, do you interpret it to mean that people know me the same 
way a person named Fred does, or that people know me by the name “Fred?” 

You see, it’s ambiguous; and it represents the entire dimension we live in. 
Everything can be taken ambiguously and therefore subject to personal 
interpretation. Reading is no different. Every passage is understood 
differently depending upon the personal lean of the reader. 

To test this would be impossible. Therefore, the tester must be in the 
position to allow personal interpretation. In this manner, schools are sorely 
lacking in resources and desire to initiate a testing program of this nature. 

In this course I encourage the administrator of the course to relax and allow 
for personal interpretation. You might be surprised at the results. 

 

Schools instill conformity 

If you read intuitively, you will be taught to read “correctly” like the others. 
Conformity is the great killer of creativity. As one is forced to conform, his 
personal identity is taken over by the collective whole into a mass of 
conformity and mediocrity. 

In order to break out of the conformity cage and take on your own creative 
genius, you and others around you may need to relax their expectations of 
you. Because we are conditioned to “save” one another when one of us goes 
“astray,” we tend to seek, as a collective group, to hold each other in our old 
patterns. It’s more comfortable that way - it’s familiar and safe. 

When one of us begins to change, the others will seek to exert pressure on 
the recalcitrant one in order to bring them back into the flock - back into 
conformity and safety. In school, we found that peer pressure kept us in line, 
and the school authorities backed that up with force. School conformity is 
our culture’s norming element. 

I believe that we force our children to attend school, not so much to get an 
education in science and math, but to learn to conform. Even in the post-
scholastic environment, conformity is the most important thing. Think about 
it a little and you will come to notice that it is those who reject conformity 
who are ostracized and punished by society. 

Except for certain notable professions, like clowning, acting, and politics, 
everyone is expected to conform to those around them. In the arena of 
reading this conformity has taught us to read slowly, if at all, and to judge 


ourselves unable or unworthy to do anything else. This belief is an 
underlying structure of mind control in authoritarian dictatorships and state-
run societies. 

Miller illustrates the power of conformity in her enlightening treatises on the 
origins of child abuse in America (re: For Your Own Good, Miller). She 
follows the lives of well-known mass killers, like Adolph Hitler and others, 
who, with the assistance of societal support for conformity, brought about 
horror on a global scale. It is my hope that as you open your intuitive 
reading abilities you also awaken the deep stirring of divinity within you. 

 

The “Problem” With School 

Schools are ill equipped to teach visual reading skills to young children. 
Phonics is a great starting point when children are allowed to be creative 
rather than forced to conform. Since most schools teach phonics as the only 
method, few children are presented with any other option. 

Because we are presented with no other options, we tend to believe that 
there are none. Life then seems to dwindle into fewer options until we 
believe that we are out of options and we die. There is much anxiety and 
invalidation involved in this process. It’s a whole life lesson taught to us in 
first grade reading class. Light Speed Reading is about options and opening. 
The very essence of A Course in Light Speed Reading is life transformation. 

Intuitive readers (those who can intuit the story quickly) have been 
discouraged and labeled “weird,” “strange,” or worse, as “bad” or “evil”. We 
discussed this earlier. We tend to consider anyone outside the approved 
norm as “wrong”. 

The “approved norm” is so transitory, depending solely upon who is making 
the standard by which all others will be judged. Culturally we base those 
standards on collective neuroses and enforce them upon our children so they 
will be “right” (in other words neurotic like us). 

People who demonstrate an ability to read intuitively often demonstrate 
phenomenally fast reading abilities. Because they are so different from the 
rest, and schools are based upon collective learning rather than individual 
acceleration, these students are often penalized or made “special” when they 
exhibit extraordinary abilities. 

What’s more, we label them as different or “special” (like we do those with 
learning “disabilities”). Children learn quickly that it is better to be slow and 


accepted than to be quick and rejected. Many a quick learner has been 
conditioned out of their quickness by the pressure of group dynamics. Light 
Speed Reading is designed to take us all back to our basic natural abilities to 
read intuitively. 

 

What Is Reading? 

Reading is a visual process - vision is a symbolic process of seeing an item 
or symbol and translating it into an idea or image. Images are processed into 
concepts and whole dimensions of thought. 

The visual process of taking in information visually and translating that into 
dimensions of thought is very rapid. It moves at the speed of thought. There 
are some scientists like Nick Herbert who believe that this process exceeds 
the speed of light. When you come to believe that you can read in this 
dynamic way, you will find that there is no limit to how fast you can read. 
Literally, you can read faster than you can turn the pages. 

Whole-brain, intuitive, symbolic reading is meant to be a conceptual 
metaphor for life. It is blueprinted into your right-left brained, holistic mind. 
I believe that reading has been with man from such primitive times that it is 
encoded in our DNA. 

We know how to read instinctively. Think about this: a child is born and 
what is the first thing he/she does? The baby looks into mother’s face and 
“reads” it, mapping it into memory and “knowingness.” 

Next, it will “read” its environment in every detail, imprinting the images as 
life-long knowledge. We know how to read right out of the package. I find it 
interesting that we seek to “teach” our children how to read in school by 
creating a method for them to follow that is contrary to their natural way of 
learning. A Course in Light Speed Reading returns us to that natural state of 
learning. 

“Reading” is the natural passage of ideas and concepts from one person to 
another (mind-to-mind communication). The intuitive process allows us to 
contact the author mind-to-mind. Because each of us has an intuitive nature 
and each of us has an imagination, reading is simply connecting one 
person’s intuition to another’s. Because the author is imagining something 
(even when the author is writing about facts), the reader can interpret those 
writings and glean the author’s imaginings. 


On this planet reading is not unique to humanity. Many creatures and plants 
“read” their environment to determine their times and seasons, whether or 
not they are in danger, when it’s time to sleep, or when they will mate. Even 
plants interpret the symbols around them. When there is a nip in the air in 
autumn, the trees drop their leaves and begin the process of winter sleep. 

Reading is all around us and it is natural. No one had to teach the bears how 
to hibernate or the trees to know how to prepare for winter. No one has to 
teach you how to be intuitive; you are already. All that must be done is to 
un-learn what you have been conditioned to believe about yourself. 

Energetic on many levels of human experience, reading energizes the reader 
when done naturally. When you feel depressed or tired with life, notice how 
energized you can become when introduced to a new concept or idea that 
intrigues you. Light Speed Reading is just such a resource. You can explore 
multiple ideas and concepts simultaneously. It’s an energetic experience and 
engages those exciting intuitive processes that energize the human system. 
The transmittal of ideas from person to person has always been man’s 
greatest glory. What man does with those ideas is man’s greatest 
achievement. 

Imagination is our bridge to other dimensions. Libraries and Universities are 
full of books representing the expression of that imagination. Natural 
intuitive reading is one way to encourage our imagination to flourish and our 
minds to expand. 

Anything man can conceive and believe he will achieve. 

Og Mandino 

Reading is personal, private, and individually interpretive (each person is 
correct within their own frame of reference). Take any two people and tell 
them something and you will get two individually tailored interpretations of 
what was said. It is so with life, too; each person believing they have the 
correct interpretation of life’s symbols. 

The principle of perception accepts that we all are correct in our 
interpretation based upon each person’s perspective. Our entire earthly 
experience is subjective; that is, subject to personal interpretation and 
perception. Because of this wonderful ability to perceive, we can allow each 
person to have their own interpretation of their reading experience. 

What one person is sure of another will doubt. What one person interprets in 
a reading will be totally different to the next person who reads the same 


material. It is because each has a different frame of reference in regard to the 
material. 

To expect a child to interpret written symbols on a page exactly the same as 
another or the teacher is to ascribe collective consciousness onto personal 
consciousness. It is an earthly impossibility. We are each unique in our 
interpretation of life’s symbols because we are each unique beings. 

Beyond the earthly realms of separation and uniqueness, our minds are able 
to tap into the boundless realm of collective consciousness and make eternal 
connections beyond our earth-bound consciousness. It is in the realm of the 
infinite that intuition and imagination play key roles. 

Reading one word at a time is earth-bound (bound by the speed of speech). 
Reading by intuition takes one into the realm of the infinite where 
possibilities are boundless and imagination rules. I believe that we are 
always who we believe ourselves to be. 

 

The Visual Reading Process 

Visual Perception 

There are very special mechanisms involved in the visual perception 
process. The eye is only one small part. Following the optic nerve from the 
eye into the center of the brain we find that the information gathered by the 
eye is first processed in a place called the limbic system. 

The connection there is called the Lateral Geniculate Nucleus, or LGN. This 
process is part of the Thalamus, which in turn is part of the Limbic System. 
The Limbic System has long been known as the emotional center for the 
brain. The job of the limbic system is to process memories, provide 
emotional response, and to initiate fight or flight mechanisms. 

The optic nerve continues through the center of the brain to the occipital 
lobe at the rear of the head. From there the “picture” is presented to the rest 
of the brain for processing. Because of this “stop-over” at the emotional 
limbic system you never really see what you are looking at. What you see is 
a composite of what is there and what you “feel” about what you see. That’s 
why you sometimes see something different from what is really there or why 
you might miss something that you look directly at. The emotions and 
memories cloud your visual perception. 

Let’s return to the Lateral Geniculate Nuclei (there are two of them - one for 
each eye). These are marvelous structures in our brains. Their job is to make 


changes to our visual receptors (our eyes) to assist us in matching our inner 
vision to our outer sensory input. Your vision of what you want to see is 
matched up with what your eyes actually see to create a composite “picture” 
at the eye itself. 

Your mind has the marvelous ability to “create” reality through perception. 
A special trait of human perception is called “patterning” in which your 
mind will create a continuation of a pattern when it perceives such a pattern. 
In other words, you will tend to continue a pattern when you perceive that 
such a pattern exists. An example might be in a relationship with someone. 
If a person in your life acts in a certain way often enough, you will tend to 
believe that they will continue to act that way in the future, too. It’s a 
continuation of a known (perceived) pattern. 

 

 


Seeing Between the Lines 

 

 


Referring to the illustration above, do you see the shapes within the lines? 
What you see are patterns of breaks in the lines. The shapes you “see” are 
really patterns you create in your mind. Does it look like the “shape” lines 
are slightly larger as they cross the black lines and thinner as they pass 
through the white areas? 

For some, it will appear as though the white “lines” are laying over the black 
in a near-three dimensional “lumpy” look, as though the white lines were 
white tape crossing over black garden hoses. The rods in the photo-receptive 
areas of the eye, which notice differences between light and dark, amplify 
this illusion. Where the two are in close proximity as they are at the line 
breaks, a distortion of perception is created that makes those places appear 
larger than where the color (or lack of it) appears solid. Vision, like the other 
senses, is so easily fooled because it is based on expectation and assumption 
rather than actual empirical data. 

This exercise is a wonderful brain hemispheric balancing activity. The left-
mode sees the lines and the breaks in the lines while the right-mode sees the 
shapes within the lines. Practice with this exercise will tend to strengthen the 


corpus callosum in the brain, the part that shares information between brain 
hemispheres, resulting in a strengthening of intuition, reasoning, and 
lucidity. 

 

Reading and Perception 

Light-Speed Reading utilizes this innate ability to create what we see to fill-
in the details of the story as you see each page. What’s more, even if you 
were to read the story slowly, the same thing would occur - you would settle 
in on a pattern of story line and fill in the rest - sometimes even “spacing 
out” while you read, yet still coming away with a story. Have you ever 
found yourself “awakening” after reading for a while and wonder what you 
just read? In that time when your reading went on autopilot, you were 
probably daydreaming or contemplating some other subject. Most of us tend 
to return a few paragraphs or sentences to retrieve what we think we have 
lost. And yet, it is just like the dots exercise - your mind filled in the story 
behind your daydream - you just didn’t believe it - so you turned back the 
text until you felt that you could connect the pattern of the story and 
continue on. 

It’s conditioning that forces us to continually read in circles - forward a way 
then circle back, then forward again reading the same material over and over 
until we think we have it. The joke on us is that our marvelous minds have 
had it all along. It’s only our conditioning, our habits that slow us down. 
You did not have to do anything special to “see” the lines continue across 
the page - your mind simply did it for you. You don’t have to work at 
reading; your mind does it automatically. With practice, the skill becomes a 
principle and then it becomes you. 

Light-Speed Reading is simply a return to who we are: the Light that already 
knows it all. We are merely remembering our selves. Allowing visual 
reading to be like the dots exercise - natural and normal - returns us to our 
native powerful self. It’s a matter of awareness. 

Your brain/mind has two halves or hemispheres that play together in a dance 
of harmony and rhythm. Sometimes that harmony and rhythm is somewhat 
troubled or awkward. So often our conditioning, our habits, our traditions, 
get in the way of smooth and harmonious integration of our two halves. The 
great eastern religions call these halves yin (feminine principle) and yang 
(masculine principle). They are represented quite obviously in our brain 


hemispheres. The objective of Light-Speed Reading is a smooth integration 
of left (masculine) and right (feminine) hemispheres. 

Have you ever watched great dancers like Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers 
perform? The movement is so graceful and fluid. When one moves the other 
moves to enhance the other’s performance and we applaud and pay them 
great sums of money. We are reminded when we see such performances of 
our own integrative process within our minds - the dance between our 
masculine manifestation energy and our feminine knowingness. It’s a dance 
that we choreograph and produce. We introduce coaches throughout our 
lives that teach us how to dance; yet it is our own choices that make our 
dance our own (any good dancer will tell you that every performance is 
different and unique - just like our own thought processes - similar, yet 
distinctly different from anyone else). 

Light-Speed Reading is a choreographed effort of harmony and rhythm that 
is intended to bring both hemispheres, both energies, together. As you learn 
to respect your feminine energies and appreciate your masculine energies, 
you will move into a realm of light-speed possibilities and increased 
awareness. It is a realm of light and energy, oneness and wholeness, 
unbounded by limiting thoughts. This Light-Speed Reading course is as 
much a self-assisted therapy as it is a course in reading skills. As you 
develop your reading abilities, you will simultaneously develop your 
integrative, self-empowering, light-speed awareness. 

You are more than whatever you think you are. Living in a dimension of 
perceived limitation gives us the opportunity to experience what it is to be 
less than all. Yet, the funny part is that we are all. We just perceive that we 
are not. It is a choice we make to experience limitation. Depending upon 
what we focus attention, we get a different experience. For example, stare at 
the star below. Keep staring until you see a “hole” into another dimension. 
When you do, change your perception to see another perspective. Then 
another. How many perspectives can you imagine with the same “star”? 

 

 

 

 


The Dreaming Self 

Have you ever awakened in the morning, got out of bed, gone to the 
bathroom, brushed your teeth, maybe even showered, then awakened again 
finding yourself in bed again? You were dreaming that you were doing all 
those things when you perceived you were awake. Yet, even though you 
were convinced that you were awake, you were still sleeping and the 
perception of getting up, brushing your teeth, showering, etc., was a dream. 
Sometimes you may even have dreams that are so vivid that you become 
convinced that they are “reality”. Most of us don’t even remember our 
dreams, yet it is scientifically proven that everyone dreams - it keeps us 
alive. If you could remember your dreams, you would probably notice that 
you were convinced in each case that the dream was real. 

A special kind of dreaming is called lucid dreaming. It is a condition in 
which you become aware and convinced that you are dreaming - that what 
you are experiencing is fantasy. When you become aware that you are 
dreaming, it opens the awareness that you are perfectly safe (it is just a 
dream) and can experience anything you want to experience including that 
which is impossible in this dimension - like flying, swimming in earth, and 
instantaneous travel. Most lucid dreams are exceptionally vivid, including all 
sensory feeling (sight, sound, feel, taste, smell, and beyond). In the lucid 
state you can direct the dream and control all the characters - because you 
realize that it is you that created them all! In a sense, you are the god of that 
dimension. With practice, some lucid dreamers are even able to cross 
dimensions into this world and cause changes here, too. As far-fetched as 
this may seem there is even more. 

You, too, have the ability to lucid dream. In fact, how do you know you are 
not dreaming right now? What is it that convinces you that what you are 
experiencing now is “real”? Is it that others agree with you? What if they, 
like in your sleeping dreams, are dream characters in another dream? How 
can you trust what you are experiencing? In your sleeping dreams, don’t the 
characters act and sound like they are real? Don’t they work to convince you 
that they are real? You could be dreaming at this instant! In the next instant 
you could awaken on a couch or bed and say, “Wow, what a vivid, realistic 
dream I just had!” Consider for a moment that those who you trusted to 
teach you about this dimension (like your parents) might be dream 
characters, too; that like your sleeping dreams, you create all the characters, 
situations, and backgrounds (like houses, yards, fields, forests, etc.). If this 


dimension were a dream, then who is responsible for and creating every bit 
of it? If you are dreaming, you are the creator of it all. 

When you Light-Speed Read, consider while you read that you could be 
dreaming, and that in your dream, you can read and understand instantly, 
completely. It is, after all, just a dream and you can have it any way you 
want in your lucidity. Here’s an exercise that may assist you in taking full 
direction of your wake-state dream: 

 

Awake-State Dream Awareness Exercise 

Look around you at the things you notice in your perception. Perhaps there 
is a chair, a bed, a car, a telephone pole, or a bush in your perceptual field. 
Take about ten minutes and say this statement to each item you perceive 
(sense deeper and harder in order to notice everything available - including 
sounds, sights, tastes, smells, feelings): “Be there. I created you. Thank-you 
for obeying me.” 

Let go of the judgment you may experience about the exercise. This is an 
exercise in awareness, not conceit. It will assist you to do this exercise out 
loud, so you may want to do this when you are alone. 

Adapting your perception to view your world as a dream and you as the 
dreamer can assist you in reclaiming your personal power, the power you 
have to write your own life script and play it out. I highly recommend that 
you release yourself from your past hurtful history by seeking out a qualified 
mental health professional. A very effective means of relieving yourself of 
your past hurtful emotional load is to participate in some Rapid Eye 
Technology sessions. Relieving yourself of your hurtful past emotional 
history will allow you to open up to Light-Speed possibilities. You must free 
yourself of your hurtful perceptual history so that it will not get in the way of 
your intuition. 

 

The Role of Intuition 

Intuition is a key element in the process of Light-Speed Reading. Intuitive 
reading is more like “reading” faces or “reading” something into a 
statement. This type of reading is nearly instantaneous because it comes 
from a place in us that is timeless and spaceless. Exercises that encourage 
intuition and right-mode thinking will very likely improve your reading 
abilities in this program. 


 

 

Obstacles 

Debilitating Habits 

1. Reading each phrase more than once - you will find that you probably 
read phrases in sentences more than once. This is conditioning from school 
when you were forced to read out loud and every word had to be right. 
When you made a mistake you were told to stop and go back to correct the 
word you said wrong. 

2. Mind wandering and thought straying - when you read verbally you 
will tend to stray because your mind is made to travel quickly and process 
thoughts fast. While your left-brain is seeking to make sense of its verbally 
transliterated visual input, the rest of the brain is seeking more, quickly. As 
you remember how to read intuitively, your mind will keep pace and you 
will tend to stay on track. 


3. Concern about technique - again, 
schooling taught us to be hyper-
vigilant, lest we make a mistake and be 
shamed over it. Since Light Speed 
Reading is based upon your natural 
blueprinted ability, you can relax and 
let go of concern or hyper-vigilance 
about technique. It will come to you 
naturally. 

4. Worry about missing a critical 
“not” or other conjunctive structure - 
when you have the whole story like a 
movie, you may notice a distinct 
disregard for detail. It’s not that you 
don’t have the details, you do. It’s that 
you are no longer concerned about 
them. 

5. Self doubt - it’s a natural human concern to doubt that which you are 
unsure of. In the process of remembering your natural reading ability you 
may come face-to-face with your own Self-doubt. I use the word “Self” 
rather than the familiar “self” because I believe that it is when you go 
outside your accepted abilities that you find that Self. 


Be prepared to come nose-to-nose with your deepest doubts about yourself; 
doubts about your abilities in many areas besides reading fast. When you 
open yourself to experience Light Speed Reading for the first time since 
early childhood (when you read everything instantly), you may find that 
many other things related to your childhood and earliest learnings will come 
up for you, too. 

Stay close to someone who can assist you through your Self-doubts and 
fears. You will be glad you did, and your speed-reading experience will be 
enhanced greatly. I recommend you do Rapid Eye Technology (RET) or 
Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT) to relieve the stress of this part of your 
reading adventure. 

6. Outside anxiety or stressors (job, home, family, etc.) - no doubt about 
it, our environment affects us. Reading in an environment stressful to you 
will surely make the experience more difficult. 

Even reading at light speed can become difficult or impossible in a stressful 
environment. To counteract these effects, seek sessions of RET to dissipate 
and release the perception of negative stress while following the simple 
directions of this program. 

It has been shown to be effective for the reader to find a comfortable and 
quiet place to read. However, some choose to do their Light Speed Reading 
just prior to a big test they are about to take (like College and High School 
students). Then the material is fresh in the mind and ready to present itself to 
the reader for testing. Many students have found this technique of study 
useful (especially those who dislike studying the night before a big test). 

Performing the exercises presented in this course may alleviate much of the 
outside stress experienced before reading. They may also substantially 
reduce the amount of test anxiety you feel before school or life “tests.” 

 

Weakness to Strength 

There was once a 10 year old boy who decided to study judo despite the fact 
that he had lost his left arm in a devastating car accident. The boy began 
lessons with an old Japanese judo master. The boy was doing well, so he 
couldn’t understand why, after three months of training, the master had 
taught him only one move. 

“Sensei,” the boy finally said, “shouldn’t I be learning more moves?” 


“This is the only move you know, but this is the only move you’ll ever need 
to know,” the sensei replied. 

Not quite understanding, but believing in his teacher, the boy kept training. 

Several months later, the sensei took the boy to his first tournament. 
Surprising himself, the boy easily won his first two matches. The third match 
proved to be more difficult, but after some time, his opponent became 
impatient and charged; the boy deftly used his one move to win the match. 

Still amazed by his success, the boy was now in the finals. This time, his 
opponent was bigger, stronger, and more experienced. For a while, the boy 
appeared to be overmatched. Concerned that the boy might get hurt, the 
referee called a timeout. He was about to stop the match when the sensei 
intervened. 

“No,” the sensei insisted, “Let him continue.” 

Soon after the match resumed, his opponent made a critical mistake: he 
dropped his guard. Instantly, the boy used his move to pin him. The boy had 
won the match and the tournament. He was the champion. 

On the way home, the boy and sensei reviewed every move in each and every 
match. Then the boy summoned the courage to ask what was really on his 
mind. 

“Sensei, how did I win the tournament with only one move?” 

“You won for two reasons,” the sensei answered. “First, you’ve almost 
mastered one of the most difficult throws in all of judo. Second, the only 
known defense for that move is for your opponent to grab your left arm.” 

The boy’s biggest weakness had become his biggest strength. 

Your reading weaknesses can be your greatest strength. The more you relax 
into the reading program, the easier it will be for you; and you may find that 
your weaknesses have become your greatest asset. 

 


General Supporting Processes 

1. Rapid Eye Technology (RET) Sessions. RET releases the stress that 
holds you back from your potential. Done as it is outlined in this course, 
RET enhances your reading experience while releasing the stress that holds 
you back. 

2. Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT). EFT can be used to facilitate 
goal achievement by aligning your meridians for optimum energy. 

3. Baroque music as soft, quiet, background music (esp. Handel and 
Vivaldi1). Many studies show that Baroque music, Handel and Vivaldi in 
particular, increases learning ability. What’s more, the music actually speeds 
the process of learning (remembering). 

4. Breathing exercises (refer to Breathing Exercises). As I have already 
stated, breathing is fundamental to life in general and reading in particular. 
In conjunction with breathing exercises, just plain old physical exercise is 
good for the learning environment. When our bodies are stressed with 
enjoyable exercise, they function better, including reading. 

5. Focus exercises (refer to Support Exercises). In the text of this course I 
have devised and borrowed several exercises to enhance your Light Speed 
Reading experience. Most of these exercises are meant to be life-enhancing 
exercises as well. Consider them gifts from me to you. 

6. Awareness exercises (refer to Support Exercises). As your conscious 
awareness becomes more acute, so will be your ability to do what you 
believe now to be miraculous. As you awaken from your sleeping 
consciousness to an awareness of who you are beyond the body and the 
behaviors, you may come to understand that you are much more than you 
can begin to conceive. With the understanding of how great a being you 
really are, light speed-reading is simply a small characteristic of such a great 
being. 

7. Examine thoughts and feelings about what you just read. I’ve heard it 
said and I believe it from my own experience, “The greatest distance is the 
one foot from your head to your heart.” As you come to experience and 
express your emotional self you may come to appreciate how wonderful 
emotion is and how inseparably connected that part of you is with your 
intuition. 

Perhaps you’ve heard the phrase, “follow your heart”? In the process of 
intuitive reading, you must trust your heart and with that trust comes an 


experience of the heart called love. It is the love of self. Trusting your 
intuitive feelings can open up the most beautiful and exquisite experiences 
of your life. Release your fear about following your intuition or your heart. 
There are some wonderful workshops covering this very subject of heart life. 
I recommend you attend some. Learning to trust your heart will remind you 
to trust your intuition. As you trust your intuition, your reading speed and 
comprehension will skyrocket. So, Trust! Trust! Trust! 

8. Link vague ideas to concrete ideas - Recall one thing then link it to 
another and another... This is our natural recall mechanism. Following the 
process that your mind already does makes Light Speed Reading a cinch. 
Recalling dreams in the same manner can create for you an experience of 
lucid dreaming, by far the most powerful form of imagery. 

Lucid dreaming is when you become conscious that you are dreaming while 
you are in a dream. You get a full sensory experience of anything you want 
in full safety because you know for certain you are dreaming. There is no 
end to the possibilities you can experience in this form of imagery. 

Light Speed Reading is based upon a similar principle: full sensory 
experience in a safe environment (the reading environment). Recalling 
vague ideas and concepts is about subtle energy and the workings of it. As 
you come to trust your vague ideas and concepts as real, you will open your 
intuitive senses and find that the concrete ideas are then easily recalled. 
Especially when you know you will be right when you do this, you can relax 
and enjoy the experience. 

Until you have developed the skills of Light Speed Reading, you will by 
necessity need to release your attachment to being “right” and correct. In 
other words, you may Light Speed read a book, make notes about it, and feel 
that you were completely off base and missed the story altogether. 

Be patient with yourself and believe that you have simply interpreted the 
story your way at this point in time. It really has nothing to do with being 
“right” or “wrong” and everything to do with personal perception. Accept it 
and trust yourself and you will find one day that suddenly it’s all clear and 
easy. Just like that! 

9. Eye Patching - Balances brain hemispheres for whole-brain activities. 
Place the patch on one eye for several minutes (10-20 minutes) then place it 
over the other eye for the same amount of time. This is an exercise that can 
bring about greater results than the improvement of the reading experience. 


Patching alone has been shown to improve reading speed and 
comprehension. 

If you continue to see life as you have always seen life, you will continue to 
get from life what you have always gotten from life. Until you change your 
basic thought processes about life you will continue to experience life as you 
have always done. Patching the eyes provides your brain with a new 
perspective on life. Even for a short while, patching can significantly change 
your perspective and your underlying paradigm (beliefs). Eye Patching tends 
to balance brain hemispheres. What most people will first experience with 
eye patching is an increase in visual acuity, a sense of “lightness” in the 
room, and an overall lessening of stress and strain on the eyes. 

With one eye patched, one brain hemisphere tends to become hypersensitive 
(intensifying) while the other seeks to compensate, becoming hypo-sensitive 
(lessening). This imbalance creates a state wherein the person has two 
completely different concepts of the perceptual world. One concept is that 
being directly fed from the uncovered eye to the brain. The other concept is 
that being shared from the uncovered eye - through it’s governing brain 
hemisphere - to the other brain hemisphere. This condition strengthens the 
communication bridge between brain hemispheres and tends to create a 
paradigm shift (a change of thought patterning).Some conditions that seem 
to improve after eye patching: 

 

Obsessions 

Chronic Intrusive 
Thoughts 

Chronic Pain 

Excessive Mind 
Chatter 

Compulsions 

Chronic Anxieties 

Conflicts 

Chronic Depression 

Fixations 

Chronic Frustrations 

Chronic Anger, 
Rage 

Chronic Substance 
Abuse 

Chronic 
Fatigue 

Chronic Grief & 
Sadness 

Chronic Fears 
(phobias) 

Chronic Over/Under 
Weight 



 


 How to Eye Patch 

1. Place the eye patch over one eye (either eye will do). Adjust it to 
fit comfortably. 
2. Experience the patch for several minutes - 20 minutes or until you 
feel uncomfortable whichever is less 
3. Place the patch over the other eye for several minutes - 20 minutes 
or until you feel uncomfortable whichever is less 
4. Practice patching one eye, then the other, until you are comfortable 
wearing the patch on each eye for about 20 minutes each 
5. Patch the eyes at least twice per day - morning and evening 
6. If you feel distressed, take off the patch, do RET first aid, patch 
again, and call me for an appointment soon - you’ve probably 
found an issue that’s ready to work 


What you might experience after eye patching: 

 

• Some physical discomfort - nausea, headache 
• Physical cleansing - diarrhea, nausea, sweating, cold symptoms 
• A change in visual acuity - you may want to have your eyes 
checked by a qualified optometrist if you notice a change 
• A clarity or clouding of thought - usually a clouding or confusion 
will arise before a clarity 
• Lessening of mental clutter after a period of increased mental 
chatter 
• Lessening of overall stress after a period of increased stress 


 

 

Activities to do while eye patching 

 

1. Reading - practice reading with one eye patched, then the other, for 
a few weeks to improve speed and comprehension 
2. During a conflict with a family member - for greater positive 
results both participants patch (usually the right eye) 
3. Just prior to any test or examination - during preparation time (to 
assist in comprehension and retention of material) 
4. Listen to Baroque music - Handel, Telamon, Beethoven, Mozart - 
enhances the patching effect (keep eyes open while listening) 



5. While listening to verbal instructions or during a presentation - 
patch the eye that clarifies the material for you 


Warning: Do not patch the eyes during times when depth perception is 
important (such as driving, operating dangerous equipment or machines, 
cutting with knives, walking up/down stairs, etc.). 

 


Emotional First Aid 

RET (Rapid Eye Technology)® 

There are some powerful steps you can take to relieve emotional upset or 
trauma at the time you experience it. The following are simple techniques 
you can use to quickly regain your composure, get through a difficult time, 
or enhance performance. 

 

1.Identify something that is stressing you. Keep it simple _ maybe 
something recent. For more stressful material, or to do more than this simple 
process, go to www.rapideye.org or call 503-399-1181 to find a therapist in 
your area to work with. 
2.While thinking about what is stressing you, gage how much you feel it on 
a scale of 0_10 with 0 meaning not at all and 10 meaning totally stressed 
out. 
3.Cast your eyes back and forth in a zigzag pattern while moving the zigzag 
up and down as long as you can before you either can’t or you want to blink 
a lot. 
4.Blink hard 3_4 times 
5.Take three deep breaths, letting each out all at once in a sigh. 
6.Gage again how you feel on the same 0_10 scale and notice the difference 
in the way you feel. 
7.Repeat the process to de_stress more or to process another issue. 


 

 

This quick process is intended for simple stress and is not intended to 
replace competent medical or psychological assistance. If you are dealing 
with physical problems or an emergency, seek qualified medical attention. 

 

 


Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT)® 

Step 1 - Name the problem, 
clearly, directly and 
truthfully. 


Step 2 - Take a SUD1 reading 
of how bad it is right now 0 _ 
10 

(0 = none, 10 = unbearable) 

Step 3 - Setup2 - “Even 
though [I have this problem], 
I deeply and completely 
accept myself” - speak three 
times out loud, while rubbing 
the Sore Spot3. For example: 

“Even though I have this pain 
in my arm, I deeply and 
completely accept myself” 

Step 4 - Using one or two 
fingers, rapidly tap each of the 
points 7-10 times, starting 
from point 1 (eyebrow) and 
ending with point 7 (under arm), then back to point 6 (collar bone); while 
tapping each point, speak out loud, once at each point, a keyword or phrase 
that assists you in keeping focus on the problem: 

Keyword Example: “pain” 

Step 5 - Check SUD level. If significant progress has been made, yet some 
remains, go on to step 6. If no progress has been made (SUD remains high), 
return to step 1 and explore what other problem may be under this one. 
(example: “I did something stupid and hurt my arm.” setup: “Even though I 
did something stupid and hurt my arm I deeply and completely accept 
myself.” Keyword: “Hurt” or “Stupid”). 

Step 6 - While rubbing the sore spot, change the Setup to: 

“Even though there is still some of this problem [pain] remaining, I deeply 
and completely accept myself.” 

Return to step 4 using keyword: “remaining” _ meaning “remaining 
[problem or pain]”. 

Step 7 - If, after using the new Setup in step 6, the SUD level is not yet 
down to 0-1, rub the sore spot using this new setup: 


“I really want to get completely over this problem [pain], and I deeply and 
completely accept myself.” 

Return to step 4 using keywords: “completely over” - meaning “completely 
over this [problem or pain]” 

 

Tapping Points Locations 

1 Inside edge of the eyebrow 

2 On bone outside the eye 

3 On bone under the eye 

4 Under the nose 

5 Between mouth and chin 

6 About one inch down and out from top of sternum 

7 Tender spot about 4 inches below armpit (bra line) 

 

Note: The order of tapping is insignificant. The order presented here is so 
you will more likely remember them all. 

 

1 SUD = Subjective Units of Disturbance or Distress (0 - 10 scale) 

2 Alternative Setup statement: “Even though I have this problem, I really 
want to accept myself.” 

3 Sore spot - Place your hand over your heart. Where your fingers fall is the 
“sore spot”. 

Adapted with permission from Gary Craig’s Emotional Freedom 
Techniques® www.emofree.com 

 

 


Mind Machines 

Mind Machines (MM) are machines that project flashing light and binaural 
sound through goggles and headphones. The operator/wearer initiates a 
program in the MM while sitting or lying quietly with eye lids closed. I’ve 
found MMs to be especially useful in initiating spontaneous lucid dreaming, 
which assists in the formation and strengthening of fundamental neural 
networks necessary for Light-Speed Reading. 

I offer a variety of Mind Machines that present several built-in programs so 
you don’t have to be a genius to operate them. I suggest that you select a 
different program each night. Explore which programs energize you and 
which relax you. If the MM bothers you, you can do the Emotional First Aid if 
you feel that it bothers you or gets in the way of what you want to do. You 
can find a better explanation and synopsis at www.jbennette.com. 

 

 


Support Games and Exercises 

Reading the Signs 

Sometimes reading can be made very fun and portable by looking at road 
signs as they pass by. This is an exercise in quick identification for children 
and anyone desiring to improve their native intuitive skills. Road signs can 
be like “Flash Cards” for children or adults learning to identify words with 
meanings. Seeing things quickly at the periphery of awareness will increase 
your perception of things at the periphery of consciousness, like intuition. 
This exercise is for a passenger or passengers of a vehicle or bus. 

Procedure: 

.. While riding in a vehicle as a passenger, look far out in front of the 
vehicle. 
.. Notice road signs out of the corner of your eyes 
.. Read them as they pass by, keeping your eyes fixed to the front 
.. Notice how easy it is to read the signs of the road as you focus 
ahead 
.. For children and new readers, large single word signs can be 
identified with practice 
.. More advanced readers may want to identify longer phrases 


Remember to trust yourself 

.. Whatever is read is correct (resist the temptation to correct the 
reader - just notice) 


Praise goes far! 

 

Variation: 

.. Play the above procedure as a game: 
.. Choose teams or play as individuals 
.. Notice a road sign 
.. Team 1 or the first person speaks line one of the road sign 
.. Team 2 or the next person reads the next line of the road sign 
.. Continue with each line of each road sign 


 

 


Trusting Myself 

(A simplified exercise in seeing beyond form) 

People often experience things and then doubt what they experience. These 
people will often seek others to give them reality through agreement. That is 
to say, they will believe what they experience if someone else can 
substantiate it with them. For example, one person may “see” the human 
energy field, yet they will doubt that it is so unless someone else tells them 
they also “saw” the phenomenon. This exercise is designed to give you an 
experience in intuitive process that can be used anywhere, anytime. As you 
practice this exercise, you will gain trust in your intuitive ability, including 
Light-Speed Reading (otherwise known as Intuitive Reading). 

Equipment Required: 

A suitable background: a wall of solid color (off-white or tan is great) or you 
can construct a large solid color backdrop the size of a person (about 6 feet 
tall and about 3 feet wide). You may instead use a cream colored or white 
sheet pulled tight so there are no wrinkles or waves in the material. 

Procedure: 

 

1. Place an object large enough to observe (like a vase of flowers) in 
front of the background 
2. Stare at the object, looking “through” it (like you would if you 
were looking at one of those 3D pictures made of dots or waves) 
3. Let yourself become a little “dreamy” as you look 
4. Now allow your vision to drift to the side of the object, still 
focusing attention on the object 
5. This is called a “soft focus” and is extremely beneficial in speed 
reading 
6. Now notice a difference in your view of the object (like a halo 
effect or corona effect around the object) 
7. You are observing more than that object - Now trust that you are 
seeing it! 
8. Allow yourself to be correct whether you “see” something or you 
don’t - either way is okay 
9. The object of the exercise is to trust yourself about what you “see” 
or “don’t see” 
10. Some will see something and some will not - trust your own ability 
to sense 



11. Next do the same exercise with a human object in front of the 
background 
12. Become acutely aware of what you “see” (this kind of seeing is 
more of an awareness thing - like imagery) 
13. Practice allowing yourself to get into that dreamy state of 
awareness - it is actually a heightened state of awareness even 
though it may feel like you are falling asleep 
14. Some people will actually see something; some will feel it in their 
body; some will experience something resembling heat waves on 
the horizon on a hot day - each experience will be different - some 
will sense nothing, and each is correct and okay 
15. TRUST YOURSELF and your intuition - it may seem subtle at 
first, yet, after a while, you will trust yourself completely 
regardless of external voices or differing opinions. 


 


Making Up Stories 

The process of Light-Speed Reading is based on intuition. The intuitive 
process of reading is greatly enhanced with the proper use of the principle of 
assumption. In Light-Speed Reading the story is assumed then checked for 
differences. This is the same principle that is used by your senses. What you 
sense is compared to what you already believe before you sense (measure) 
that belief. What’s more, where the belief is strong enough sensory input is 
conditioned to fit the belief. We actually know the story before we sense it; 
then we compare what we believe with what we measure with our visual 
sense. This exercise encourages and enhances this basic nature toward the 
process of reading. This exercise may be done as a family game with great 
results. 

Procedure: 

Choose 1 word at random from each of the columns on the Story 
Words Page. Select words in order by column (i.e., one word from 
column 1, then a word from column 2, and so forth). 

Make up a story that speaks to all the words in order. 

 

Example: 

Mother - Singing - Hair - Fishing 

John’s mother was sure that he had gone fishing when she called home. She 
went to the fishing pond just outside town. There she found John’s hair on 
the dock. She was sure something terrible had happened to John when she 
heard him singing. Sure enough, there he was, in a boat, floating along on 
the pond, his singing voice drifting across the water like driftwood. She 
sighed a sigh of relief as she turned toward home. She would go home and 
wash her hair with a song in her heart. 

 

 


Story Words Page 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Mother 

Running 

Father 

Fishing 

House 

Eating 

Barn 

Jumping 

Bird 

Shoving 

Curtain 

Playing 

Pillow 

Being 

Hair 

Dancing 

Coat 

Singing 

Shoe 

Falling 

Tree 

Climbing 

Money 

Touching 

Summer 

Sharing 

Winter 

Asking 

Foot 

Turning 

Sky 

Bringing 

Food 

Crying 

Telephone 

Carrying 

Jungle 

Sailing 

Cardboard 

Living 

Book 

Trading 

Glass 

Telling 

Bubbles 

Fighting 

Socks 

Blowing 

Cat 

Kicking 

Dog 

Pulling 

Box 

Flying 

Street 

Drinking 

Ball 

Speaking 

Lamp 

Diving 

Mirror 

Writing 

Hands 

Lighting 

Clock 

Reading 

Color 

Tickling 

Bottle 

Talking 

Floor 

Tasting 

Picture 

Saving 

Blanket 

Rolling 

Can 

Smiling 

Shirt 

Waving 



 

 

 

 


Drawing the Story 

This exercise is intended to promote intuitive processes through the use of 
art. This exercise may be done as a fun family game. 

Equipment required: 

Pencil or pen, paper 

Procedure: 

.. Develop a story from the Story Words Page or make up a story. 
.. Tell the story in as much detail as you feel inclined to do. 
.. Each person participating draws what he or she hears. Be creative 
and imaginative. DO NOT compare drawings unless you all agree 
to do so - just for fun. All creations are equally good. It just is. 


 

If you are doing this exercise alone, you may use the following alternative: 

.. Recall someone’s story you heard some time today. 
.. Draw a picture of what you recall of the story. 
.. Allow your picture to be whatever it is. Accept it as perfect for 
you. 
.. Enjoy the exercise of drawing. 


 

Enjoy drawing for the fun of drawing. Make sure you do not compare for 
quality. Everyone draws what he or she draws and it is all good. 

 

 

Pop Art Finger Painting 

As with the previous exercise, this exercise encourages intuitive processes 
that promote Light-Speed Reading. 

Equipment required: 

Finger-paints, finger painting paper, coveralls or old shirts, newspaper, 
rubber gloves, if necessary 

Procedure: 

 

1. Prepare a table or floor with newspaper (to protect the finish of the 
table of floor). 



2. Place finger painting paper on the table or floor on top of the 
newspaper. 
3. Following the directions on the finger painting materials, HAVE 
FUN! 
4. Create something that doesn’t make any sense. It is important that 
you “draw” what you feel, not what you think. Just let your fingers 
and hands go where they will. Completely let go of the need to 
analyze your painting or to make anything recognizable - just let 
go... 
5. When you are complete with your drawing, let it dry and place it 
where you can admire it often. Your own “Pop Art” expression is a 
representation of your inner self. Honoring your inner self in this 
manner encourages it to come out to assist you in other intuitive 
endeavors, like Light-Speed Reading. 


 

 

 

 

New Point of Awareness 

When the right and left sides of the brain communicate with the conscious 
and subconscious, a new point of awareness is developed, a balanced view. 
This exercise is to assist anyone in developing a new point of awareness (a 
new level of consciousness). 

Procedure: 

 

1. Sit upright (preferably on the floor) 
2. Close your eyes 
3. Rock your upper body back and forth (forward and back) a few 
inches for 30 seconds 
4. Rock your upper body side to side a few inches for 30 seconds 
5. Circle the upper body clockwise (as you would look down on a 
clock) for 30 seconds 
6. Circle the upper body counterclockwise for 30 seconds 
7. While holding the body still imagine doing full body tumbles in 
the air (as if you were floating) for 30 seconds 
8. Stand up and spin to your right, arms extended, for 3 spins 


 

 


 

Spinning 

Like the previous exercise, this will cause the right and left-brains to 
communicate. Also, this exercise tends to bring you into a more receptive 
spiritual condition. 

 Procedure: 

 

1. Stand in place, feet together 
2. Extend your arms straight out to the sides 
3. Turn to your right in a circle a number of times 


 

 

Journaling Dreams 

There are many similarities between reading and dreaming. When reading, 
even though you are inputting visual words to the brain, it is the image 
created by the meaning of those words that makes it reading and is similar to 
dreaming. In fact, a dreamy state of altered consciousness is preferred in 
Light-Speed Reading. Generally, when one reads thousands of words per 
minute, the images come fast and vague. Much like dreaming, the images 
can be recalled using the same mechanism used to retrieve dream memories. 
This is a procedure for recalling dreams and Light-Speed Reading images 
and concepts. Practicing dream recall will assist you in recalling (and thus 
improving comprehension of) read material. 

Procedure: 

 

1. Upon waking, immediately ask yourself, “What was I just 
dreaming about?” 
2. Write down your dream as you remember it 
3. Link vague memories to concrete memories (the “that reminds me 
of...” system) 
4. Trust your vague memories about your dreams until they become 
more concrete 
5. Link more vague memories to the new concrete ones until the 
entire dream is recalled 
6. Continue with all dreams 


 

 

 


The Butterfly 

A man found a cocoon of a butterfly. One day a small opening appeared, he 
sat and watched the butterfly for several hours as it struggled to force its 
body through that little hole. Then it seemed to stop making any progress. It 
appeared as if it had gotten as far as it could and it could go no further. 

Then the man decided to help the butterfly, so he took a pair of scissors and 
snipped off the remaining bit of the cocoon. The butterfly then emerged 
easily. But it had a swollen body and small, shriveled wings. The man 
continued to watch the butterfly because he expected that, at any moment, 
the wings would enlarge and expand to be able to support the body, which 
would contract in time. Neither happened! In fact, the butterfly spent the rest 
of its life crawling around with a swollen body and shriveled wings. It never 
was able to fly. 

What the man in his kindness and haste did not understand was that the 
restricting cocoon and the struggle required for the butterfly to get through 
the tiny opening were nature’s way of forcing fluid from the body of the 
butterfly into its wings so that it would be ready for flight once it achieved 
its freedom from the cocoon. 

Sometimes struggles are exactly what we need in our life. If we were 
allowed to go through our life without any obstacles, it would cripple us. We 
would not be as strong as what we could have been. And we could never fly. 

As you progress through the Light-Speed Reading program, be patient with 
yourself as you work. Sometimes you may feel as though it will never work. 
Just stay with it, breathe through the frustration, and you will come out with 
wings unfurled, ready to fly. 

 



 


Breathing Exercises 

Releasing 

Sigh 

Do this 3 times before any reading or testing 

Breath deeply in the nose or mouth 

Let the breath out (release the breath without force) all at once 

Keep mouth open wide 

You may include a tone or noise (like “ahh”) 

Yawn 

Breathe in the mouth deeply while opening the mouth wide 

Hold briefly 

Release all at once out the mouth with the mouth wide open 

You may include a tone or noise (like “ahh”) 

 

Physical Pain Relief 

Pant 

Small breaths in and out the mouth quickly with the mouth wide 
open 

 

Stutter Breath 

Breathe in the nose deeply while stuttering the breath (like you’re 
about to cry) 

Imagine energy coming into the body through the perineum (base 
of the spine) 

Breathe to the pain 

Breath in through the nose 

Imagine the breath going to the painful body location 

Hold the breath in that location while it “gathers” the pain 

Breathe the pain out the mouth with the breath in a fast sigh (all at 
once) 

Relaxation 


Deep Breath 

Breath in deeply through the nose 

Hold the breath for 3 seconds 

Release through the mouth slowly 

Slow Breathing 

Breath in and out very deeply and very slowly (into the abdomen) 

May be accompanied by a tone on the out breath 

 

Imagery 

Light Breath 

Breath in light through the nose from above the head 

Fill the body with light and oxygen (hold the breath and imagine 
light in every cell) 

Breath out darkness through the mouth 

Opening the Heart (abundance breath) 

Breathe in deeply through the nose imagining energy flowing in 
from the earth (below the feet) to the heart. 

Hold the breath 3 seconds. 

Breathe out while imagining energy flowing down from the sun 
and through the head to the heart, opening the heart. 

 Seeds 

We are each like a seed 

Having unlimited potential, 

Nurtured by the universe. 

As we are willing to open up 

To our own unique possibilities, 

The wondrous design 

Will burst forth! 

 

Carol Bennette, 1994 

 


Imaging Modes and Goal Setting 

 You may wish to set some goals for yourself as you progress 
through this course. Goals can be very useful especially if you 
believe in them. I recommend that if you do wish to set goals for 
yourself, that you do so according to your innate imaging mode. 
Your internal imaging mode is just that: how you image internally. 
When you close your eyes, what do you “see” with your mind’s 
eye? What you see and how you see it makes a difference in how 
you set and achieve goals. 

There is a continuum of internal imaging that extends from non-
imaging at one end to rapidly changing imaging at the other. We 
do all imaging modes at some time, yet we tend to prefer one mode 
to others, settling on one to the virtual exclusion of the others. 
Let’s look at how you prefer to internal image, and maybe learn 
some things that could assist you in setting goals for yourself. 

Here is a simple imagery I use to determine internal imaging mode. 
You may read this to someone else to determine their imaging 
mode or have someone else read this to you to determine your 
imaging mode (the “< >” signify instructions to the reader that are 
not intended to be read aloud). 

“Close your eyes for a moment... Imagine a table <pause for 3 
seconds>... Imagine a vase on the table <pause for 3 seconds>... 
And 5 red roses in the vase < pause>... Imagine you could walk up 
to the vase and smell the roses <pause>... Tap the vase and listen 
to the sound <pause>... Now, step back and change the roses to 
another kind of flower < pause>... Now, change the color of the 
flowers to another color <pause>... Now open your eyes fully 
present and in the present moment... <pause>” 

 



Non-imaging - If you had difficulty seeing what I told you to see, 
or you saw nothing at all, you probably do non-imaging. You 
probably image internally in another sense other than visual. To 


make imagery work for you, you may need to keep your eyes open. 
You probably tend to imagine only things you are familiar with. 

Fixed imaging - If you followed the imagery exactly as I directed 
you, and had trouble creating a different flower to replace the roses 
and had difficulty changing the color of the flowers, you probably 
do fixed imaging. You can hold an image internally for a long time 
without disturbance from outside influence. When you “get the 
picture” you will hold onto it and not be dissuaded by additional 
information to the contrary. 

Changing imaging - If you followed the imagery exactly as I 
directed you, you probably do changing imaging. You can hold an 
image in your mind and adjust that image easily as you are 
presented with more information about it. 

Rapidly changing imaging - If you could see internally what I 
suggested, yet wanted to add more to the imagery, became 
impatient with how long the imagery was taking, or had difficulty 
holding the image, you probably do rapidly changing imaging. 
You tend to flash on ideas as rapidly changing images rather than 
to build scenes to hold on to. You have an insatiable appetite for 
more information, yet you tend to release or forget it as you move 
on to new things. You tend to be very imaginative, yet find it 
difficult to put imagination into action without assistance from 
others who do not share your style of imaging. 

Here are some ideas about how you can set goals according to your 
imaging mode: Non, Fixed, Changing, Rapidly Changing 

Non Imaging - 

 

• Set short-term goals that you know you can achieve. 
• Keep setting goals no further out than 3 months or so - 
step-by-step, each goal within view of the last. 
• Measure goal achievement by the direction you are going 
rather than end results. 



• Join others (fixed or changing imaging mode) in a 
common direction. 
• Work out the details as you go along. 
• Like rapid imaging, non-imaging people will need to start 
often. 


 

 Fixed Imaging - 

 

• Set long-term goals with a few “marker” goals in between. 
• Be certain of your goal from the beginning - follow your 
head, rather than your heart. 
• Measure goal achievement by end results - then set the 
next goal from there. 
• Set goals years or lifetime out. 


 

 Changing Imaging - 

 

• Set long-term goals and review them occasionally to see if 
they need to be adjusted slightly. 
• Renegotiate your goals accordingly. 
• Measure goal achievement by end result, based on initial 
intent and subsequent information. 
• Adjust your goals accordingly - follow your heart rather 
than your head. 
• Re-measure achievement often - annually or semi-
annually, sometimes more often. 


 

 

 

Rapidly Changing Imaging - 

 

• Set intent often, hold goals as ideas. 
• Start several projects repeatedly. 
• Avoid concrete goal measurement. 
• Start again and feel good about yourself. 



• Measure goal achievement by the general direction you 
want to go - how do you want to feel? 
• Measure broadly rather than specifically. 
• Measure short term to determine how you feel about your 
direction. 
• Adjust direction according to how you feel emotionally 
about an end result. 


 

 

My deep thanks to Wally Minto and Alpha Awareness. 

 

Once upon a time, I, Chuang Tzu, dreamt I was a 
butterfly, fluttering hither and thither, to all intents and 
purposes a butterfly. I was conscious only of following 
my fancies as a butterfly, and was unconscious of my 
individuality as a man. 

Suddenly I awakened, and there I lay, myself again. Now 
I do not know whether I was then a man dreaming I was 
a butterfly, or whether I was a butterfly dreaming I am a 
man. 

-Chuang Tzu 

 


A Course in Light Speed Reading 

Course Outline 

Schedule of Events 

Week 1. Preparing to Read 

Day 1. Test current ability 

Day 2. Center of Creation imagery with Homunculus Man 

Day 3. Learn eye exercises - do them all 

Day 4. Eye patching and reading 

 

Week 2. Introduction to Light-Speed Reading 

Day 1. Introduce Public Library 

Day 2. Learn to turn pages rapidly 

Day 3. Eye exercises & breathing before reading 

Day 4. Basic reading principles 

 

Week 3. Light-Speed Reading 

Day 1. Go to library 

Day 2. Begin to “guess” stories read up side down 

Day 3. Repeat previous day’s exercises right side up 

Day 4. Light-speed read a book cover-to-cover 

 Week 4. Practicing Light-Speed Reading 

Day 1. Go to the library 

Day 2. Return to library 

Day 3. Return to library 

Day 4. Testing Day 

 Light-speed reading technical material & scientific reports 

Light-speed reading for young children 

 

 


Daily Schedule of Events 

Day-by-Day instructions 

 

 

 

 

Week 1 

Day 1 

 Preparation: 

Obtain several 6th grade level books (few pictures, text easy to read). Books 
may be obtained from a local library’s children’s section. 

 

Testing: 

Follow the “Testing” procedure on the following pages. Remember to keep 
it simple and easy. Put the students at ease first (lessen the performance 
anxiety by stating to them that this will be fun and easy). Participants are to 
do the best they currently know how so that a baseline reading speed may be 
determined. They may practice before testing if they wish. 

It is important to test comprehension, too, so just open the book being tested 
on after the time is up and ask general evaluative questions about the text 
(avoid questions that may be answered with a yes or no): “What was the 
major theme of what you read?” “What did you like best about what you 
read?” “Who are the major characters?” “What did these major characters do 
to develop the theme of the text?” Specific questions may deal with the 
content in a more focused manner: “What did Bob do with the treasure he 
found?” Questions that are too general are also much too subjective for 
evaluation of comprehension, so avoid questions like: “Did you like the 
book?” (too subjective and is a yes/no question). 

The results of the testing may be shared with those taking the test and talked 
about. 

 

Setting Intent: 

Today is the day to “see” the end result before the course begins in full. 
Once the testing is completed and the participants have a baseline (a starting 


point) they may make an objective goal or intent. Today, each participant 
will fill out the Baseline And Forecast that will be kept by the course 
administrator and compared with the results at the end of the course. This 
will assist the participants in noticing and appreciating their progress. Set 
goals according to the reader’s inner imaging mode. 

Awareness and appreciation are the keys to progress in any earthly 
endeavor, and is obvious in Light-Speed Reading. 

 Testing: 

An adequate reading test may be performed in about 10 - 15 minutes. 

Setup: 

1. Person being tested has a 6th grade reading level novel of sufficient length 
to be tested for 10 minutes (at light-speed, this may need to be at least 300 
pages) 

2. There is adequate lighting and ventilation so the person is comfortable 

3. The tester has a stopwatch or second hand on a watch 

 

Test procedure: 

1. At the “go” signal, the reader starts and the timer starts the clock 

2. Continue reading for 10 minutes or more 

3. When time is up, timer states, “stop reading” 

4. Mark the final page and the line where reading stopped (if the line stopped 
on is half or more of a page, the whole page may be counted as read - less 
than half don’t count) 

5. Complete the exercise on the following page to determine reading speed: 


Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) 

 



 

Testing Comprehension: 

To test comprehension, open the books to a place the person has read and 
invent questions that illustrate their comprehension of the material. Keep it 
simple: if you ask 10 questions and they answer 8 of them correctly, they 
have 80% comprehension. 

 

Using the Testing form 

How to use the reading speed form to determine Words per Minute (a 
standard reading speed measurement): 

Using the following text as an example, I’ll fill out the form for you so you 
can see how it is done. 

Seek Ye First... 

Once upon a time there was a very popular and well-attended Buddhist 
temple in China. It was the most popular and most well attended temple in 
the whole country. This continued for many years. And then a strange thing 
happened. Over a long period of time, the temple became less popular and 
less attended until finally, there was only a hand full of monks left to show 
tourists around the deteriorating buildings. At last, there were no tourists 
either and the remaining monks thought that they had better discover what 
they were doing wrong before their order became extinct and there was no 
one left to attend to the buildings. So they hired a Jewish Rabbi to come and 


assist them. The Rabbi was to spend one week with the monks and at the end 
of that week give them a report. 

As the days passed, the Rabbi spent his time doing all that the Buddhist 
monks would do: eating, sleeping, praying, and teaching. At the end of the 
week, the monks called upon the Rabbi to give them a report so they could 
increase the number of people who would attend their temple. 

The Rabbi was very polite and said, “In all your traditions you do so well. 
You pray every day several times. You eat your meals in the tradition of 
your order. You teach each other and meditate often. In all these and many 
more things you perform flawlessly. And yet you are missing one essential 
thing.” 

The monks asked anxiously, “What is it that we lack, that keeps us from 
drawing in the large numbers of people our order did centuries ago? What 
could it possibly be? Like you said, we do all the things according to our 
order and help many people, and yet our order is failing and is near 
extinction. What is it that we yet lack?” 

The Rabbi looked at each of the monks gathered together and said, “One of 
you is God.” 

With that statement, the monks looked at one another very closely, “Could it 
be you brother Chang? You feed the poor your meals each evening and 
healed a bird yesterday. Or you, brother Xing? We observed you secretly 
helping a poor widow overcome her grief at the death of her husband. Or 
you, brother Yang? Was it not you who sought to cleanse the leper last year 
and saw to his needs until the end?” 

The monks continued to question just which of them it might be. And as 
they did so, people became interested in the temple where God dwells. Soon 
the temple was filled to capacity and the former glory was rekindled in the 
people. You see, it was not the deeds of the monks that made the difference. 
It was their thoughts. As they looked to find the godly in men, they would 
find it. And in so doing, they found it in themselves as well. 

Seek to find the good; notice that which is well first; pretend that everyone 
you meet could be God because it could be so. 

 

Refer to the Example Form below: 


Step 1 - First count the total number of letters and spaces in 3 full lines of 
text. I counted 282 total letters and spaces in three full lines of text. Write 
this number in the Results block. 

Step 2 - Next, divide the total number of letters and spaces you just counted 
by 3 to get an average number of letters and spaces in a line. I get 94 (282 
divided by 3). Write this number in the Results block. 

Step 3 - Next, count all the lines in three pages of text. Since my example is 
much less than three pages, I’ll pretend that the story on the preceding page 
extended for several pages. Counting all the lines (even short ones) on three 
pages of text gives me a total of 135. Write this number in the Results block. 

Step 4 - Now divide the answer you got in Step 3 (135) by 3 to get an 
average number of lines per page: 135 divided by 3 = 45. Write this number 
in the Results block. 

Step 5 - Now to discover the number of words per line (a word is defined as 
5 letters and spaces). To do this, divide the results of Step 2 by 5 (the 
number of characters per word). Round to the nearest whole number: 94 (the 
result of Step 2) divided by 5 = 18.8 which rounds to 19. Write this number 
in the Results block. 

Step 6 - Next, we’ll discover the average number of words on each page. To 
get to this number, just multiply the results of Step 5 (the average number of 
words per line) by the results of Step 4 (the average number of lines per 
page): 19 (results of Step 5) times 45 (results of Step 4) = 855. Write this 
number in the Results block. 

Step 7 - Count the total number of pages read. You can subtract the page 
you started on from the page you ended on. Let’s say that the story started 
on the previous page went on for 100 pages and I read to page 48. Since I 
started on page 0 (the title page) and ended on page 48, I read 48 pages. 
Write this number in the Results block. 

Step 8 - To discover the total number of words I read I can multiply the 
results of Step 7 (the number of pages I read) by the results of Step 6 (the 
number of words per page): 48 (results of Step 7) times 855 (results of Step 
6) = 41,040 (total number of 5-character words read). Write this number in 
the Results block. 

Step 9 - Write in the Results block the total time you read in minutes. 
Usually this will be 10 because you will test for only 10 minutes. Write this 
number in the Results block. 


Step 10 - Now you will discover the number of Words Per Minute that you 
read by dividing the results of Step 8 (the total number of words you read) 
by the results of Step 9 (the total time in minutes that you read): 41,040 
(results of Step 8) divided by 10 (results of Step 9) = 4104. Write this 
number in the Results block. 

 


Example Testing Form 

Step 

Task 

Results 

1 

Count total number of letters & spaces in 3 lines of text 

282 

2 

Letters & spaces in 1 line (divide step 1 result by 3) 

94 

3 

Count total number of lines in 3 pages 

135 

4 

Lines Per Page (divide step 3 result by 3) 

45 

5 

Words Per Line (divide step 2 result by 5) 

19 

6 

Words Per Page (multiply step 5 result by step 4 result) 

855 

7 

Count number of pages read (last page # minus first page #) 

2 

8 

Total words read (multiply step 7 result by step 6 result) 

1710 

9 

Reading time (how many minutes did you read?) 

10 

10 

Words Per Minute (WPM) (divide step 8 results by step 9 
results) 
