Madam Pomfrey insisted on keeping Harry in the hospital wing for the
rest of the weekend. He didn't argue or complain, but he wouldn't let
her throw away the shattered remnants of his Nimbus Two Thousand. He
knew he was being stupid, knew that the Nimbus was beyond repair, but
Harry couldn't help it; he felt as though he'd lost one of his best
friends.
He had a stream of visitors, all intent on cheering him up. Hagrid sent
him a bunch of earwiggy flowers that looked like yellow cabbages, and
Ginny Weasley, blushing furiously, turned up with a get-well card she
had made herself, which sang shrilly unless Harry kept it shut under his
bowl of fruit. The Gryffindor team visited again on Sunday morning, this
time accompanied by Wood, who told Harry (in a hollow, dead sort of
voice) that he didn't blame
him in the slightest. Ron and Hermione left Harry's bedside only at
night- But nothing anyone said or did could make Harry feel any better,
because they knew only half of what was troubling him.
He hadn't told anyone about the Grim, not even Ron -and Hermione,
because he knew Ron would panic and Hermione would scoff. The fact
remained, however, that it had now appeared twice, and both appearances
had been followed by near-fatal accidents; the first time, he had nearly
been run over by the Knight Bus; the second, fallen fifty feet from his
broomstick. Was the Grim going to haunt him until he actually died? Was
he going to spend the rest of his life looking over his shoulder for the
beast?
And then there were the dementors. Harry felt sick and humiliated every
time he thought of them. Everyone said the dementors were horrible, but
no one else collapsed every time they went near one. No one else heard
echoes in their head of their dying parents.
Because Harry knew who that screaming voice belonged to now. He had
heard her words, heard them over and over again during the night hours
in the hospital wing while he lay awake, staring at the strips of
moonlight on the ceiling. When the dementors approached him, he heard
the last moments of his mother's life, her attempts to protect him,
Harry, from Lord Voldemort, and Voldemort's laughter before he murdered
her.... Harry dozed fitfully, sinking into dreams full of clammy, rotted
hands and petrified pleading, jerking awake to dwell again on his
mother's voice.
It was a relief to return to the noise and bustle of the main school on
Monday, where he was forced to think about other things, eve', if he had
to endure Draco Malfoys taunting. Malfoy was almost beside himself with
glee at Gryffindor's defeat. He had finally taken off his bandages, and
celebrated having the full use of both arms again by doing spirited
imitations of Harry falling off his broom. Malfoy spent much of their
next Potions class doing dementor imitations across the dungeon; Ron
finally cracked and flung a large, slippery crocodile heart at Malfoy,
which hit him in the face and caused Snape to take fifty points from
Gryffindor.
"If Snape's teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts again, I'm skiving
off," said Ron as they headed toward Lupin's classroom after lunch.
"Check who's in there, Hermione."
Hermione peered around the classroom door.
"It's okay!"
Professor Lupin was back at work. It certainly looked as though he had
been ill. His old robes were hanging more loosely on him and there were
dark shadows beneath his eyes; nevertheless, he smiled at the class as
they took their seats, and they burst at once into an explosion of
complaints about Snape's behavior while Lupin had been ill.
"It's not fair, he was only filling in, why should he give us homework?"
"We don't know anything about werewolves two rolls of parchment!"
"Did you tell Professor Snape we haven't covered them yet?" Lupin asked,
frowning slightly.
The babble broke out again.
"Yes, but he said we were really behind he wouldn't listen --"
"-- two rolls of parchment!"
Professor Lupin smiled at the look of indignation on every face.
"Don't worry. I'll speak to Professor Snape. You don't have to do the
essay."
"Oh no," said Hermione, looking very disappointed. "I've already
finished it!"
They had a very enjoyable lesson. Professor Lupin had brought along a
glass box containing a hinkypunk, a little one-legged creature who
looked as though he were made of wisps of smoke, rather frail and
harmless looking.
"Lures travelers into bogs," said Professor Lupin as they took notes.
"You notice the lantern dangling from his hand? Hops ahead -people
follow the light -- then --"
The hinkypunk made a horrible squelching noise against the glass.
When the bell rang, everyone gathered up their things and headed for the
door, Harry among them, but --
"Wait a moment, Harry," Lupin called. "I'd like a word."
Harry doubled back and watched Professor Lupin covering the hinkypunk's
box with a cloth.
"I heard about the match," said Lupin, turning back to his desk and
starting to pile books into his briefcase, "and I'm sorry about your
broomstick. Is there any chance of fixing it?"
"No," said Harry. "The tree smashed it to bits."
Lupin sighed.
"They planted the Whomping Willow the same year that I arrived at
Hogwarts. People used to play a game, trying to get near enough to touch
the trunk. In the end, a boy called Davey Gudgeon nearly lost an eye,
and we were forbidden to go near it. No broomstick would have a chance."
"Did you hear about the dementors too?" said Harry with difficulty.
Lupin looked at him quickly.
"Yes, I did. I don't think any of us have seen Professor Dumbledore that
angry. They have been growing restless for some time -- furious at his
refusal to let them inside the grounds.... I suppose they were the
reason you fell?"
"Yes," said Harry. He hesitated, and then the question he had to ask
burst from him before he could stop himself." Why? Why do they affect me
like that? Am I just --?"
"It has nothing to do with weakness," said Professor Lupin sharply, as
though he had read Harry's mind. "The dementors affect you worse than
the others because there are horrors in your past that the others don't
have."
A ray of wintery sunlight fell across the classroom, illuminating
Lupin's gray hairs and the lines on his young face.
"Dementors are among the foulest creatures that walk this earth. They
infest the darkest, filthiest places, they glory in decay and despair,
they drain peace, hope, and happiness out of the air around them. Even
Muggles feel their presence, though they can't see them. Get too near a
dementor and every good feeling, every happy memory will be sucked out
of you. If it can, the dementor will feed on you long enough to reduce
you to something like itself... soul-less and evil. You'll be left with
nothing but the worst experiences of your life. And the worst that
happened to you, Harry, is enough to make anyone fall off their broom.
You have nothing to feel ashamed of."
"When they get near me --" Harry stared at Lupin's desk, his throat
tight. "I can hear Voldemort murdering my mum."
Lupin made a sudden motion with his arm as though to grip Harry's
shoulder, but thought better of it. There was a moment's Silence, then
--
"Why did they have to come to the match?" said Harry bitterly.
"They're getting hungry," said Lupin coolly, shutting his briefcase with
a snap. "Dumbledore won't let them into the school, so their supply of
human prey has dried up.... I don't think they could resist the large
crowd around the Quidditch field. All that excitement ... emotions
running high... it was their idea of a feast."
"Azkaban must be terrible," Harry muttered. Lupin nodded grimly.
"The fortress is set on a tiny island, way out to sea, but they don't
need walls and water to keep the prisoners in, not when they're all
trapped inside their own heads, incapable of a single cheery thought.
Most of them go mad within weeks."
"But Sirius Black escaped from them," Harry said slowly. "He got
away..."
Lupin's briefcase slipped from the desk; he had to stoop quickly to
catch it.
"Yes," he said, straightening up, "Black must have found a way to fight
them. I wouldn't have believed it possible.... Dementors are supposed to
drain a wizard of his powers if he is left with them too long...."
"You made that dementor on the train back off," said Harry suddenly.
"There are -- certain defenses one can use," said Lupin. "But there was
only one dementor on the train. The more there are, the more difficult
it becomes to resist."
"What defenses?" said Harry at once. "Can you teach me?"
"I don't pretend to be an expert at fighting dementors, Harry, quite the
contrary..."
"But if the dementors come to another Quidditch match, I need to be able
to fight them --"
Lupin looked into Harry's determined face, hesitated, then said,
"Well... all right. I'll try and help. But it'll have to wait until next
term, I'm afraid. I have a lot to do before the holidays. I chose a very
inconvenient time to fall ill."
What with the promise of anti-dementor lessons from Lupin, the thought
that he might never have to hear his mother's death again, and the fact
that Ravenclaw flattened Hufflepuff in their Quidditch match at the end
of November, Harry's mood took a definite upturn. Gryffindor were not
out of the running after all, although they could not afford to lose
another match. Wood became repossessed of his manic energy, and worked
his team as hard as ever in the chilly haze of rain that persisted into
December. Harry saw no hint of a dementor within the grounds.
Dumbledore's anger seemed to be keeping them at their stations at the
entrances.
Two weeks before the end of the term, the sky lightened suddenly to a
dazzling, opaline white and the muddy grounds were revealed one morning
covered in glittering frost. Inside the castle, there was a buzz of
Christmas in the air. Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, had
already decorated his classroom with shimmering lights that turned out
to be real, fluttering fairies. The students were all happily discussing
their plans for the holidays. Both Ron and Hermione had decided to
remain at Hogwarts, and though Ron said it was because he couldn't stand
two weeks with Percy, and Hermione insisted she needed to use the
library, Harry wasn't fooled; they were doing it to keep him company,
and he was very grateful.
To everyone's delight except Harry's, there was to be another Hogsmeade
trip on the very last weekend of the term.
"We can do all our Christmas shopping there!" said Hermione. "Mum and
Dad would really love those Toothflossing Stringmints from Honeydukes!"
Resigned to the fact that he would be the only third year staying behind
again, Harry borrowed a copy of Which Broomstick from Wood, and decided
to spend the day reading up on the different makes. He had been riding
one of the school brooms at team practice, an ancient Shooting Star,
which was very slow and jerky; he definitely needed a new broom of his
own.
On the Saturday morning of the Hogsmeade trip, Harry bid good-bye to Ron
and Hermione, who were wrapped in cloaks and scarves, then turned up the
marble staircase alone, and headed back toward Gryffindor Tower. Snow
had started to fall outside the windows, and the castle was very still
and quiet.
"Psst -- Harry!"
He turned, halfway along the third-floor corridor, to see Fred and
George peering out at him from behind a statue of a humpbacked, one-eyed
witch.
"What are you doing?" said Harry curiously. "How come you're not going
to Hogsmeade?"
"We've come to give you a bit of festive cheer before we go," said Fred,
with a mysterious wink. "Come in here...."
He nodded toward an empty classroom to the left of the one-eyed statue.
Harry followed Fred and George inside. George closed the door quietly
and then turned, beaming, to look at Harry.
"Early Christmas present for you, Harry," he said.
Fred pulled something from inside his cloak with a flourish and laid it
on one of the desks. It was a large, square, very worn piece of
parchment with nothing written on it. Harry, suspecting one of Fred and
George's jokes, stared at it.
"What's that supposed to be?"
"This, Harry, is the secret of our success," said George, patting the
parchment fondly.
"It's a wrench, giving it to you," said Fred, "but we decided last
night, your need's greater than ours."
"Anyway, we know it by heart," said George. "We bequeath it to you. We
don't really need it anymore."
"And what do I need with a bit of old parchment?" said Harry.
"A bit of old parchment!" said Fred, closing his eyes with a grimace as
though Harry had mortally offended him. "Explain, George."
"Well... when we were in our first year, Harry -- young, carefree, and
innocent --"
Harry snorted. He doubted whether Fred and George had ever been
innocent.
"Well, more innocent than we are now -- we got into a spot of bother
with Filch."
"We let off a Dungbomb in the corridor and it upset him for some reason
--"
"So he hauled us off to his office and started threatening us with the
usual --" detention disembowelment and we couldn't help noticing a
drawer in one of his filing cabinets marked Confiscated and Highly
Dangerous.
"Don't tell me --" said Harry, starting to grin.
"Well, what would you've done?" said Fred. "George caused a diversion by
dropping another Dungbomb, I whipped the drawer open, and grabbed --
this."
"It's not as bad as it sounds, you know," said George. "We don't reckon
Filch ever found out how to work it. He probably suspected what it was,
though, or he wouldn't have confiscated it."
"And you know how to work it?"
"Oh yes," said Fred, smirking. "This little beauty's taught us more than
all the teachers in this school."
"You're winding me up," said Harry, looking at the ragged old bit of
parchment.
"Oh, are we?" said George.
He took out his wand, touched the parchment lightly, and said, "I
solemnly swear that I am up to no good."
And at once, thin ink lines began to spread like a spider's web from the
point that George's wand had touched. They joined each other, they
crisscrossed, they fanned into every corner of the parchment; then words
began to blossom across the top, great, curly green words, that
proclaimed:
Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs
Purveyors of Aids to Magical Mischief-Makers are proud to present THE
MARAUDER'S MAP
It was a map showing every detail of the Hogwarts castle and grounds.
But the truly remarkable thing were the tiny ink dots moving around it,
each labeled with a name in minuscule writing. Astounded, Harry bent
over it. A labeled dot in the top left corner showed that Professor
Dumbledore was pacing his study; the caretaker's cat, Mrs. Norris, was
prowling the second floor; and Peeves the Poltergeist was currently
bouncing around the trophy room. And as Harry's eyes traveled up and
down the familiar corridors, he noticed something else.
This map showed a set of passages he had never entered. And many of them
seemed to lead -
"Right into Hogsmeade," said Fred, tracing one of them with his finger.
"There are seven in all. Now, Filch knows about these four" -- he
pointed them out -- "but we're sure we're the only ones who know about
these. Don't bother with the one behind the mirror on the fourth floor.
We used it until last winter, but it's caved in -- completely blocked.
And we don't reckon anyone's ever used this one, because the Whomping
Willow's planted right over the entrance. But this one here, this one
leads right into the cellar of Honeydukes. We've used it loads of times.
And as you might've noticed, the entrance is right outside this room,
through that one-eyed old crone's hump."
"Moony, Wormtaill Padfoot, and Prongs," sighed George, patting the
heading of the map. "We owe them so much."
"Noble men, working tirelessly to help a new generation of lawbreakers,"
said Fred solemnly.
"Right," said George briskly. "Don't forget to wipe it after you've used
it or anyone can read it," Fred said warningly.
"Just tap it again and say, 'Mischief managed!' And it'll go blank."
"So, young Harry," said Fred, in an uncanny impersonation of Percy,
"mind you behave yourself."
"See you in Honeydukes," said George, winking.
They left the room, both smirking in a satisfied sort of way.
Harry stood there, gazing at the miraculous map. He watched the tiny ink
Mrs. Norris turn left and pause to sniff at something on the floor. If
Filch really didn't know... he wouldn't have to pass the dementors at
all....
But even as he stood there, flooded with excitement, something Harry had
once heard Mr. Weasley say came floating out of his memory.
Never trust anything that can think for itself, if you can't see where
it keeps its brain.
This map was one of those dangerous magical objects Mr. Weasley had been
warning against.... Aids for Magical Mischief Makers... but then, Harry
reasoned, he only wanted to use it to get into Hogsmeade, it wasn't as
though he wanted to steal anything or attack anyone... and Fred and
George had been using it for years without anything horrible
happening....
Harry traced the secret passage to Honeydukes with his finger.
Then, quite suddenly, as though following orders, he rolled up the map,
stuffed it inside his robes, and hurried to the door of the classroom.
He opened it a couple of inches. There was no one outside. Very
carefully, he edged out of the room and behind the statue of the
one-eyed witch.
What did he have to do? He pulled out the map again and saw to his
astonishment, that a new ink figure had appeared upon it, labeled Harry
Potter. This figure was standing exactly where the real Harry was
standing, about halfway down the third-floor corridor.
Harry watched carefully. His little Ink self appeared to be tapping the
witch with his minute wand. Harry quickly took out his real wand and
tapped the statue. Nothing happened. He looked back at the map. The
tiniest speech bubble had appeared next to his figure. The word inside
said, "Dissendium."
"Dissendium!" Harry whispered, tapping the stone witch again.
At once, the statue's hump opened wide enough to admit a fairly thin
person. Harry glanced quickly up and down the corridor, then tucked the
map away again, hoisted himself into the hole headfirst, and pushed
himself forward.
He slid a considerable way down what felt like a stone slide, then
landed on cold, damp earth. He stood up, looking around. It was
pitch dark. He held up his wand, muttered, "Lumos! " and saw that he was
in a very narrow, low, earthy passageway. He raised the map, tapped it
with the tip of his wand, and muttered, "Mischief managed!" The map went
blank at once. He folded it carefully, tucked it inside his robes, then,
heart beating fast, both excited and apprehensive, he set off.
The passage twisted and turned, more like the burrow of a giant rabbit
than anything else. Harry hurried along it, stumbling now and then on
the uneven floor, holding his wand out in front of him.
It took ages, but Harry had the thought of Honeydukes to sustain him.
After what felt like an hour, the passage began to rise. Panting, Harry
sped up, his face hot, his feet very cold.
Ten minutes later, he came to the foot of some worn stone steps, which
rose out of sight above him. Careful not to make any noise, Harry began
to climb. A hundred steps, two hundred steps, he lost count as he
climbed, watching his feet.... Then, without warning, his head hit
something hard.
It seemed to be a trapdoor. Harry stood there, massaging the top of his
head, listening. He couldn't hear any sounds above him. Very slowly, he
pushed the trapdoor open and peered over the edge.
He was in a cellar, which was full of wooden crates and boxes. Harry
climbed out of the trapdoor and replaced it -- it blended so perfectly
with the dusty floor that it was impossible to tell it was there. Harry
crept slowly toward the wooden staircase that led upstairs. Now he could
definitely hear voices, not to mention the tinkle of a bell and the
opening and shutting of a door.
Wondering what he ought to do, he suddenly heard a door open much closer
at hand; somebody was about to come downstairs.
"And get another box of Jelly Slugs, dear, they've nearly cleaned us out
--" said a woman's voice.
A pair of feet was coming down the staircase. Harry leapt behind an
enormous crate and waited for the footsteps to pass. He heard the man
shifting boxes against the opposite wall. He might not get another
chance --
Quickly and silently, Harry dodged out from his hiding place and climbed
the stairs; looking back, he saw an enormous backside and shiny bald
head, buried in a box. Harry reached the door at the top of the stairs,
slipped through it, and found himself behind the counter of Honeydukes
-- he ducked, crept sideways, and then straightened up.
Honeydukes was so crowded with Hogwarts students that no one looked
twice at Harry. He edged among them, looking around, and suppressed a
laugh as he imagined the look that would spread over Dudley's piggy face
if he could see where Harry was now.
There were shelves upon shelves of the most succulent-looking sweets
imaginable. Creamy chunks of nougat, shimmering pink squares of coconut
ice, fat, honey-colored toffees; hundreds of different kinds of
chocolate in neat rows; there was a large barrel of Every Flavor Beans,
and another of Fizzing Whizbees, the levitating sherbert balls that Ron
had mentioned; along yet another wall were "Special Effects" -- sweets:
Droobles Best Blowing Gum (which filled a room with bluebell-colored
bubbles that refused to pop for days), the strange, splintery
Toothflossing Stringmints, tiny black Pepper Imps ("breathe fire for
your friends!"), Ice Mice ("hear your teeth chatter and squeak!"),
peppermint creams shaped like toads ("hop realistically in the
stomach!"), fragile sugar-spun quills, and exploding bonbons.
Harry squeezed himself through a crowd of sixth years and saw a sign
hanging in the farthest corner of the shop (UNUSUAL TASTES). Ron and
Hermione were standing underneath it, examining a tray of blood-flavored
lollipops. Harry sneaked up behind them.
"Ugh, no, Harry won't want one of those, they're for vampires, I
expect," Hermione was saying.
"How about these?" said Ron, shoving a jar of Cockroach Clusters under
Hermione's nose.
"Definitely not," said Harry.
Ron nearly dropped the jar.
"Harry!" squealed Hermione. "What are you doing here? How -- how did you
--?"
"Wow!" said Ron, looking very impressed, "you've learned to Apparate!"
"'Course I haven't," said Harry. He dropped his voice so that none of
the sixth years could hear him and told them all about the Marauder's
Map.
"How come Fred and George never gave it to me!" said Ron, outraged. "I'm
their brother!"
"But Harry isn't going to keep it!" said Hermione, as though the idea
were ludicrous. "He's going to hand it in to Professor McGonagall,
aren't you, Harry?"
"No, I'm not!" said Harry.
"Are you mad?" said Ron, goggling at Hermione. "Hand in something that
good?"
"If I hand it in, I'll have to say where I got it! Filch would know Fred
and George had nicked it!"
"But what about Sirius Black?" Hermione hissed. "He could be using one
of the passages on that map to get into the castle! The teachers have
got to know!"
"He can't be getting in through a passage," said Harry quickly. "There
are seven secret tunnels on the map, right? Fred and George reckon Filch
already knows about four of them. And of the other three -- one of
them's caved in, so no one can get through it. one of them's got the
Whomping Willow planted over the entrance, so you can't get out of it.
And the one I just came through -well - - it's really hard to see the
entrance to it down in the cellar, so unless he knew it was there..."
Harry hesistated. What if Black did know the passage was there?
Ron, however, cleared his throat significantly, and pointed to a notice
pasted on the inside of the sweetshop door.
--------BY ORDER OF -------- THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC
Customers are reminded that until further notice, dementors will be
patrolling the streets of Hogsmeade every night after sundown. This
measure has been put in place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and
will be lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black. It is therefore
advisable that you complete your shopping well before nightfall.
Merry Christmas!
"See?" said Ron quietly. "I'd like to see Black try and break into
Honeydukes with dementors swarming all over the village. Anyway,
Hermione, the Honeydukes owners would hear a break-in, wouldn't they?
They live over the shop!"
"Yes, but but --" Hermoine seemed to be struggling to find another
problem. "Look, Harry still shouldn't be coming into Hogsmeade. He
hasn't got a signed form! If anyone finds out, he'll be in so much
trouble! And it's not nightfall yet -- what if Sirius Black turns up
today? Now?"
"He'd have a job spotting Harry in this," said Ron, nodding through the
mullioned windows at the thick, swirling snow. "Come on, Hermione, it's
Christmas. Harry deserves a break."
Hermione bit her lip, looking extremely worried.
"Are you going to report me?" Harry asked her, grinning.
"Oh -- of course not -- but honestly, Harry --"
"Seen the Fizzing Whizbees, Harry?" said Ron, grabbing him and leading
him over to their barrel. "And the Jelly Slugs? And the Acid Pops? Fred
gave me one of those when I was seven -- it burnt a hole right through
my tongue. I remember Mum walloping him with her broomstick." Ron stared
broodingly into the Acid Pop box. "Reckon Fred'd take a bit of Cockroach
Cluster if I told him they were peanuts?"
When Ron and Hermione had paid for all their sweets, the three of them
left Honeydukes for the blizzard outside.
Hogsmeade looked like a Christmas card; the little thatched cottages and
shops were all covered in a layer of crisp snow; there were holly
wreaths on the doors and strings of enchanted candles hanging in the
trees.
Harry shivered; unlike the other two, he didn't have his cloak. They
headed up the street, heads bowed against the wind, Ron and Hermione
shouting through their scarves.
"That's the post office
"Zonko's is up there --"
"We could go up to the Shrieking Shack
"Tell you what," said Ron, his teeth chattering, "shall we go for a
butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks?"
Harry was more than willing; the wind was fierce and his hands were
freezing, so they crossed the road, and in a few minutes were entering
the tiny inn.
It was extremely crowded, noisy, warm, and smoky. A curvy sort of woman
with a pretty face was serving a bunch of rowdy warlock' up at the bar.
"That's Madam Rosmerta," said Ron. "I'll get the drinks, shall I?" he
added, going slightly red.
Harry and Hermione made their way to the back of the room, ,,her, there
was a small, vacant table between the window and a handsome Christmas
tree, which stood next to the fireplace. Ron came back five minutes
later, carrying three foaming tankards of hot butterbeer.
"Merry Christmas!" he said happily, raising his tankard.
Harry drank deeply. It was the most delicious thing he'd ever tasted and
seemed to heat every bit of him from the inside.
A sudden breeze ruffled his hair. The door of the Three Broomsticks had
opened again. Harry looked over the rim of his tankard and choked.
Professors McGonagall and Flitwick had just entered the pub with a
flurry of snowflakes, shortly followed by Hagrid, who was deep in
conversation with a portly man in a lime-green bowler hat and a
pinstriped cloak -- Cornelius Fudge, Minister of Magic.
In an instant, Ron and Hermione had both placed hands on the top of
Harry's head and forced him off his stool and under the table. Dripping
with butterbeer and crouching out of sight, Harry clutched his empty
tankard and watched the teachers' and Fudge's feet move toward the bar,
pause, then turn and walk right toward him.
Somewhere above him, Hermione whispered, Mobiliarbus!"
The Christmas tree beside their table rose a few inches off the ground,
drifted sideways, and landed with a soft thump right in front of their
table, hiding them from view. Staring through the dense lower branches,
Harry saw four sets of chair legs move back from the table right beside
theirs, then heard the grunts and sighs If the teachers and minister as
they sat down.
Next he saw another pair of feet, wearing sparkly turquoise high heels,
and heard a woman's voice. "A small gillywater --"
"Mine," said Professor McGonagall's voice.
"Four pints of mulled mead --"
"Ta, Rosmerta," said Hagrid.
"A cherry syrup and soda with ice and umbrella --"
"Mmm!" said Professor Flitwick, smacking his lips.
"So you'll be the red currant rum, Minister."
"Thank you, Rosmerta, m'dear," said Fudge's voice. "Lovely to see you
again, I must say. Have one yourself, won't you? Come and join us...."
"Well, thank you very much, Minister."
Harry watched the glittering heels march away and back again. His heart
was pounding uncomfortably in his throat. Why hadn't it occurred to him
that this was the last weekend of term for the teachers to& And how long
were they going to sit there? He needed time to sneak back into
Honeydukes if he wanted to return to school tonight.... Hermione's leg
gave a nervous twitch next to him.
"So, what brings you to this neck of the woods, Minister?" came Madam
Rosmerta's voice.
Harry saw the lower part of Fudge's thick body twist in his chair as
though he were checking for eavesdroppers. Then he said in a quiet
voice, "What else, m'dear, but Sirius Black? I daresay you heard what
happened up at the school at Halloween?"
I did hear a rumor," admitted Madam Rosmerta.
"Did you tell the whole pub, Hagrid?" said Professor McGonagall
exasperatedly.
"Do you think Blacks still in the area, Minister?" whispered Madam
Rosmerta.
"I'm sure of it," said Fudge shortly.
"You know that the dementors have searched the whole village twjce?"
said Madam Rosmerta, a slight edge to her voice. "Scared all my
customers away... It's very bad for business, Minister."
"Rosmerta, dear, I don't like them any more than you do," said Fudge
uncomfortably. "Necessary precaution... unfortunate, but there YOU
are.... I've just met some of them. They're in a fury against Dumbledore
-- he won't let them inside the castle grounds."
"I should think not," said Professor McGonagall sharply. "How are we
supposed to teach with those horrors floating around?"
"Hear, hear!" squeaked tiny Professor Flitwick, whose feet were dangling
a foot from the ground.
"All the same," demurred Fudge, "they are here to protect you all from
something much worse.... We all know what Black's capable of..."
"Do you know, I still have trouble believing it," said Madam Rosmerta
thoughtfully. "Of all the people to go over to the Dark Side, Sirius
Black was the last I'd have thought... I mean, I remember him when he
was a boy at Hogwarts. If you'd told me then what he was going to
become, I'd have said you'd had too much mead."
"You don't know the half of it, Rosmerta," said Fudge gruffly. "The
worst he did isn't widely known."
"The worst?" said Madam Rosmerta, her voice alive with curiosity, "Worse
than murdering all those poor people, you mean?"
"I certainly do," said Fudge.
"I ca'A believe that. What could possibly be worse?" "You say you
remember him at Hogwarts, Rosmerta," mur- mured Professor McGonagall.
"Do you remember who his-best friend was?"
"Naturally," said Madam Rosmerta, with a small laugh. "Never saw one
without the other, did you? The number of times I had them in here --
ooh, they used to make me laugh. Quite the double act, Sirius Black and
James Potter!"
Harry dropped his tankard with a loud clunk. Ron kicked him.
"Precisely," said Professor McGonagall. "Black and Potter. Ringleaders
of their little gang. Both very bright, of course -- exceptionally
bright, in fact -- but I don't think we've ever had such a pair of
troublemakers --"
"I dunno," chuckled Hagrid. "Fred and George Weasley could give 'em a
run fer their money."
"You'd have thought Black and Potter were brothers!" chimed in Professor
Flitwick. "Inseparable!"
"Of course they were," said Fudge. "Potter trusted Black beyond all his
other friends. Nothing changed when they left school. Black was best man
when James married Lily. Then they named him godfather to Harry. Harry
has no idea, of course. You can imagine how the idea would torment him."
"Because Black turned out to be in league with You-Know-Who?" whispered
Madam Rosmerta.
"Worse even than that, rn'dear...." Fudge dropped his voice and
proceeded in a sort of low rumble. "Not many people are aware that the
Potters knew You-Know-Who was after them. Dumbledore, who was of course
working tirelessly against You-Know-Who, had a number of useful spies.
One of them tipped him off, and he alerted James and Lily at once. He
advised them to go into hiding. Well, of course, You-Know-Who wasn't an
171
easy person to hide from. Dumbledore told them that their best chance
was the Fidelius Charm."
"How does that work?" said Madam Rosmerta, breathless with interest.
Professor Flitwick cleared his throat.
"An immensely complex spell," he said squeakily, "involving the magical
concealment of a secret inside a single, living soul. The information is
hidden inside the chosen person, or Secret-Keeper, and is henceforth
impossible to find -- unless, of course, the Secret-Keeper chooses to
divulge it. As long as the Secret-Keeper refused to speak, You-Know-Who
could search the village where Lily and James were staying for years and
never find them, not even if he had his nose pressed against their
sitting room window!"
"So Black was the Potters' Secret-Keeper?" whispered Madam Rosmerta.
"Naturally," said Professor McGonagall. "James Potter told Dumbledore
that Black would die rather than tell where they were, that Black was
planning to go into hiding himself... and yet, Dumbledore remained
worried. I remember him offering to be the Potters' Secret-Keeper
himself."
"He suspected Black?" gasped Madam Rosmerta.
"He was sure that somebody close to the Potters had been keeping
You-Know-Who informed of their movements," said Professor McGonagall
darkly. "Indeed, he had suspected for some time that someone on our side
had turned traitor and was passing a lot of information to
You-Know-Who."
"But James Potter insisted on using Black?"
"He did," said Fudge heavily. "And then, barely a week after the
Fidelius Charm had been performed --" "Black betrayed them?" breathed
Madam Rosmerta.
"He did indeed. Black was tired of his double-agent role, he was ready
to declare his support openly for You-Know-Who, and he seems to have
planned this for the moment of the Potters' death. But, as we all know,
You-Know-Who met his downfall in little Harry Potter. Powers gone,
horribly weakened, he fled. And this left Black in a very nasty position
indeed. His master had fallen at the very moment when he, Black, had
shown his true colors as a traitor. He had no choice but to run for it
--"
"Filthy, stinkin' turncoat!" Hagrid said, so loudly that half the bar
went quiet.
"Shh!" said Professor McGonagall.
"I met him!" growled Hagrid. "I musta bin the last ter see him before he
killed all them people! It was me what rescued Harry from Lily an'
James's house after they was killed! jus' got him outta the ruins, poor
little thing, with a great slash across his forehead, an' his parents
dead... an' Sirius Black turns up, on that flyin' motorbike he used ter
ride. Never occurred ter me what he was doin' there. I didn' know he'd
bin Lily an' James's Secret-Keeper. Thought he'd jus' heard the news o'
You-Know-Who's attack an' come ter see what he could do. White an'
shakin', he was. An' yeh know what I did? I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN'
TRAITOR!" Hagrid roared.
"Hagrid, please!" said Professor McGonagall. "Keep your voice down!"
"How was I ter know he wasn' upset abou' Lily an' James? It was
You-Know-Who he cared abou'! An' then he says, 'Give Harry ter me,
Hagrid, I'm his godfather, I'll look after him --' Ha! But I'd had me
orders from Dumbledore, an' I told Black no, Dumbledore said Harry was
ter go ter his aunt an' uncle's. Black argued, but in the end he gave
in. Told me ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there. 'I won't need it
anymore,' he says.
"I shoulda known there was somethin' fishy goin' on then. He loved that
motorbike, what was he givin' it ter me for? Why wouldn' he need it
anymore? Fact was, it was too easy ter trace. Dumbledore knew he'd bin
the Potters' Secret-Keeper. Black knew he was goin' ter have ter run fer
it that night, knew it was a matter o' hours before the Ministry was
after him.
"But what if I'd given Harry to him, eh? I bet he'd 've pitched him off
the bike halfway out ter sea. His bes' friends' son! But when a wizard
goes over ter the Dark Side, there's nothin' and no one that matters to
em anymore...."
A long silence followed Hagrid's story. Then Madam Rosmerta said with
some satisfaction, "But he didn't manage to disappear, did he? The
Ministry of Magic caught up with him next day!"
"Alas, if only we had," said Fudge bitterly. "It was not we who found
him. It was little Peter Pettigrew -- another of the Potters' friends.
Maddened by grief, no doubt, and knowing that Black had been the
Potters' Secret-Keeper, he went after Black himself."
"Pettigrew... that fat little boy who was always tagging around after
them at Hogwarts?" said Madam Rosmerta.
"Hero-worshipped Black and Potter," said Professor McGonagall. "Never
quite in their league, talent-wise. I was often rather ,harp with him.
You can imagine how I -how I regret that now..." She sounded as though
she had a sudden head cold.
"There, now, Minerva," said Fudge kindly, "Pettigrew died a hero's
death. Eyewitnesses -- Muggles, of course, we wiped their, memories
later -- told us how Pettigrew cornered Black. They say he was sobbing,
'Lily and James, Sirius! How could you?' And then he went for his wand.
Well, of course, Black was quicker. Blew Pettigrew to smithereens...."
Professor McGonagall blew her nose and said thickly, "Stupid boy ...
foolish boy... he was always hopeless at dueling... should have left it
to the Ministry...."
"I tell yeh, if I'd got ter Black before little Pettigrew did, I
wouldn't 've messed around with wands -- I'd 've ripped him limb -- from
-- limb," Hagrid growled.
"You don't know what you're talking about, Hagrid," said Fudge sharply.
"Nobody but trained Hit Wizards from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad
would have stood a chance against Black once he was cornered. I was
Junior Minister in the Department of Magical Catastrophes at the time,
and I was one of the first on the scene after Black murdered all those
people. I -- I will never forget it. I still dream about it sometimes. A
crater in the middle of the street, so deep it had cracked the sewer
below. Bodies everywhere. Muggles screaming. And Black standing there
laughing, with what was left of Pettigrew in front of him... a heap of
bloodstained robes and a few -- a few fragments --"
Fudge's voice stopped abruptly. There was the sound of five noses being
blown.
"Well, there you have it, Rosmerta," said Fudge thickly. "Black was
taken away by twenty members of the Magical Law Enforcement 'Squad and
Pettigrew received the Order of Merlin, First Class, which I think was
some comfort to his poor mother. Blades been in Azkaban ever since."
Madam Rosmerta let out a long sigh.
"Is it true he's mad, Minister?"
"I wish I could say that he was," said Fudge slowly. "I certainly
believe his master's defeat unhinged him for a while. The murder of
Pettigrew and all those Muggles was the action of a cornered and
desperate man -- cruel... pointless. Yet I met Black on my last
inspection of Azkaban. You know, most of the prisoners in there sit
muttering to themselves in the dark; there's no sense in them... but I
was shocked at how normal Black seemed. He spoke quite rationally to me.
It was unnerving. You'd have thought he was merely bored -- asked if I'd
finished with my newspaper, cool as you please, said he missed doing the
crossword. Yes, I was astounded at how little effect the dementors
seemed to be having on him -- and he was one of the most heavily guarded
in the place, you know. Dementors outside his door day and night."
"But what do you think he's broken out to do?" said Madam Rosmerta.
"Good gracious, Minister, he isn't trying to rejoin You-Know-Who, is
he?"
I daresay that is his -- er -- eventual plan," said Fudge evasively.
"But we hope to catch Black long before that. I must say, You-Know-Who
alone and friendless is one thing... but give him back his most devoted
servant, and I shudder to think how quickly he'll rise again...."
There was a small chink of glass on wood. Someone had set down their
glass.
"You know, Cornelius, if you're dining with the headmaster, he'd better
head back up to the castle," said Professor McGonagall.
One by one, the pairs of feet in front of Harry took the weight of their
owners once more; hems of cloaks swung into sight, and Madam Rosemerta's
glittering heels disappeared behind the bar. The door of the Three
Broomsticks opened again, there was another flurry of snow, and the
teachers had disappeared.
"Harry?"
Ron's and Hermione's faces appeared under the table. They were both
staring at him, lost for words.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
THE FIREBOLT
Harry didn't have a very clear idea of how he had managed to get back
into the Honeydukes cellar, through the tunnel, and into the castle once
more. All he knew was that the return trip seemed to take no time at
all, and that he hardly noticed what he was doing, because his head was
still pounding with the conversation he had just heard.
Why had nobody ever told him? Dumbledore, Hagrid, Mr. Weasley, Cornelius
Fudge... why hadn't anyone ever mentioned the fact that Harry's parents
had died because their best friend had betrayed them?
Ron and Herinione watched Harry nervously all through dintier, not
daring to talk about what they'd overheard, because Percy was sitting
close by them. When they went upstairs to the crowded common room, it
was to find Fred and George had set off half a dozen Dungbombs in a fit
of end- of-term high spirits. Harry, who didn't want Fred and George
asking him whether he'd reached Hogsmeade or not, sneaked quietly up to
the empty dormitory and headed straight for his bedside cabinet. He
pushed his books aside and quickly found what he was looking for -- the
leather-bound photo album Hagrid had given him two years ago, which was
full of wizard pictures of his mother and father. He sat down on his
bed, drew the hangings around him, and started turning the pages,
searching, until...
He stopped on a picture of his parents' wedding day. There was his
father waving up at him, beaming, the untidy black hair Harry had
inherited standing up in all directions. There was his mother, alight
with happiness, arm in arm with his dad. And there ... that must be him.
Their best man... Harry had never given him a thought before.
If he hadn't known it was the same person, he would never have guessed
it was Black in this old photograph. His face wasn't sunken and waxy,
but handsome, full of laughter. Had he already been working for
Voldemort when this picture had been taken? Was he already planning the
deaths of the two people next to him? Did he realize he was facing
twelve years in Azkaban, twelve years that would make him
unrecognizable?
But the dementors don't affect him, Harry thought, staring into the
handsome, laughing face. He doesn't have to hear my Min screaming if
they get too close -
Harry slammed the album shut, reached over and stuffed it back into his
cabinet, took off his robe and glasses and got into bed, making sure the
hangings were hiding him from view.
The dormitory door opened.
"Harry?" said Ron's voice uncertainly.
But Harry still, pretending to be asleep. He heard Ron leave again, and
rolled over on his back, his eyes wide open.
A hatred such as he had never known before was coursing through Harry
like poison. He could see Black laughing at him through the darkness, as
though somebody had pasted the picture from the album over his eyes. He
watched, as though somebody was playing him a piece of film, Sirius
Black blasting Peter Pettigrew (who resembled Neville Longbottom) into a
thousand pieces. He could hear (though having no idea what Black's voice
might sound like) a low, excited mutter. "It has happened, My Lord...
the Potters have made me their Secret-Keeper and then came another
voice, laughing shrilly, the same laugh that Harry heard inside his head
whenever the dementors drew near....
"Harry, you -- you look terrible."
Harry hadn't gotten to sleep until daybreak. He had awoken to find the
dormitory deserted, dressed, and gone down the spiral staircase to a
common room that was completely empty except for Ron, who was eating a
Peppermint Toad and massaging his stomach, and Hermione, who had spread
her homework over three tables.
"Where is everyone?" said Harry.
"Gone! It's the first day of the holidays, remember?" said Ron, watching
Harry closely. "It's nearly lunchtime; I was going to come and wake you
up in a minute."
Harry slumped into a chair next to the fire. Snow was still falling
outside the windows. Crookshanks was spread out in front of the fire
like a large, ginger rug.
"You really don' look well, you know," Hermione said, peering anxiously
into his face.
"I'm fine," said Harry.
"Harry, listen," said Hermione, exchanging a look with Ron, you must be
really upset about what we heard yesterday. But the thing is, you
mustn't go doing anything stupid."
"Like what?" said Harry.
"Like trying to go after Black," said Ron sharply.
Harry could tell they had rehearsed this conversation while he had been
asleep. He didn't say anything.
"You won't, will you, Harry?" said Hermione.
"Because Black's not worth dying for," said Ron.
Harry looked at them. They didn't seem to understand at all.
"D'you know what I see and hear every time a dementor gets too near me?"
Ron and Hermione shook their heads, looking apprehensive. "I can hear my
mum screaming and pleading with Voldemort. And if you'd heard your mum
screaming like that, just about to be killed, you wouldn't forget it in
a hurry. And if you found out someone who was supposed to be a friend of
hers betrayed her and sent Voldemort after her --"
"There's nothing you can do!" said Hermione, looking stricken. "The
dementors will catch Black and he'll go back to Azkaban and -- and serve
him right!"
"You heard what Fudge said. Black isn't affected by Azkaban like normal
people are. It's not a punishment for him like it is for the others."
"So what are you saying?" said Ron, looking very tense. "You want to --
to kill Black or something?"
"Don't be silly," said Herinione in a panicky voice. "Harry doesn't want
to kill anyone, do you, Harry?"
Again, Harry didn't answer. He didn't know what he wanted to do. All he
knew was that the idea of doing nothing, while Black was at liberty, was
almost more than he could stand.
Malfoy knows," he said abruptly. "Remember what he said to me in
Potions? 'If it was me, I'd hunt him down myself... I'd want revenge.
"You're going to take Malfoy's advice instead of ours?" said Ron
furiously. "Listen... you know what Pettigrew's mother got back after
Black had finished with him? Dad told me -- the Order of Merlin, First
Class, and Pettigrew's finger in a box. That was the biggest bit of him
they could find. Black's a madman, Harry, and he's dangerous --"
"Malfoy's dad must have told him," said Harry, ignoring Ron. "He was
right in Voldemort's inner circle --"
"Say You-Know-Who, will you?" interjected Ron angrily.
"-- so obviously, the Malfoys knew Black was working for Voldemort --"
"-- and Malfoy'd love to see you blown into about a million pieces, like
Pettigrew! Get a grip. Malfoy's just hoping you'll get Yourself killed
before he has to play you at Quidditch."
"Harry, please," said Hermione, her eyes now shining with tears, "Please
be sensible. Black did a terrible, terrible thing, but d-don't Put
Yourself in danger, it's what Black wants.... Oh, Harry, you'd be
Playing right into Black's hands if you went looking for him. Your mum
and dad wouldn't want you to get hurt, would they? They'd never want you
to go looking for Black!"
"I'll never know what they'd have wanted, because thanks to Black, I've
never spoken to them," said Harry shortly.
There was a silence in which Crookshanks stretched luxuriously flexing
his claws. Ron's pocket quivered.
"Look," said Ron, obviously casting around for a change of subject,
"it's the holidays! It's nearly Christmas! Let's -- let's go down and
see Hagrid. We haven't visited him for ages!"
"No!" said Hermione quickly. "Harry isn't supposed to leave the castle,
Ron --"
"Yeah, let's go," said Harry, sitting up, "and I can ask him how come he
never mentioned Black when he told me all about my parents!"
Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasn't what Ron had had in
mind.
"Or we could have a game of chess, he said hastily, "or Gobstones. Percy
left a set --"
"No, let's visit Hagrid," said Harry firmly.
So they got their cloaks from their dormitories and set off through the
portrait hole ("Stand and fight, you yellow-bellied mongrels!"), down
through the empty castle and out through the oak front doors.
They made their way slowly down the lawn, making a shallow trench in the
glittering, powdery snow, their socks and the hems of their cloaks
soaked and freezing. The Forbidden Forest looked as though it had been
enchanted, each tree smattered with silver, and Hagrid's cabin looked
like an iced cake.
Ron knocked, but there was no answer.
"He's not out, is he?" said Hermione, who was shivering under her cloak.
Ron had his ear to the door.
"There's a weird noise," he said. "Listen -- is that Fang?"
Harry and Hermione put their ears to the door too. From inside the cabin
came a series of low, throbbing moans.
"Think we'd better go and get someone?" said Ron nervously.
"Hagrid!" called Harry, thumping the door. "Hagrid, are you in there.
There was a sound of heavy footsteps, then the door creaked open. Hagrid
stood there with his eyes red and swollen, tears splashing down the
front of his leather vest.
"YWve heard?" he bellowed, and he flung himself onto Harry's neck.
Hagrid being at least twice the size of a normal man, this was no
laughing matter. Harry, about to collapse under Hagrid's weight, was
rescued by Ron and Hermione, who each seized Hagrid under an arm and
heaved him back into the cabin. Hagrid allowed himself to be steered
into a chair and slumped over the table, sobbing uncontrollably, his
face glazed with tears that dripped down into his tangled beard.
"Hagrid, what is it?" said Hermione, aghast.
Harry spotted an official-looking letter lying open on the table.
"What's this, Hagrid?"
Hagrid's sobs redoubled, but he shoved the letter toward Harry, who
Picked it up and read aloud:
Dear Mr. Hagrid,
Further to our inquiry into the attack by a hippogriff on a student in
your class, we have accepted the assurances of Professor Dumbledore that
you bear no responsibility for the regrettable incident.
"Well, that's okay then, Hagrid!" said Ron, clapping Hagrid oil the
shoulder. But Hagrid continued to sob, and waved one of his gigantic
hands, inviting Harry to read on.
However, we must register our concern about the hippogriff in question.
We have decided to uphold the official complaint of Mr. Lucius Malfoy,
and this matter will therefore be taken to the Committee for the
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. The hearing will take place on April
20th, and we ask you to present yourself and your hippogriff at the
Committee's offices in London on that date. In the meantime, the
hippogriff should be kept tethered and isolated. Yours in fellowship...
There followed a list of the school governors.
"Oh," said Ron. "But you said Buckbeak isn't a bad hippogriff, Hagrid. I
bet he'll get off
"Yeh don' know them gargoyles at the Committee fer the Disposal o'
Dangerous Creatures!" choked Hagrid, wiping his eyes on his sleeve.
"They've got it in fer interestin' creatures!"
A sudden sound from the corner of Hagrid's cabin made Harry, Ron, and
Hermione whip around. Buckbeak the hippogriff was lying in the corner,
chomping on something that was oozing blood all over the floor.
"I couldn' leave him tied up out there in the snow!" choked Hagrid. "All
on his own! At Christmas."
Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another. They had never seen eye
to eye with Hagrid about what he called "interesting creatures" and
other people called "terrifying monsters." Or' the other hand, there
didn't seem to be any particular harm in Buckbeak. In fact, by Hagrid's
usual standards, he was positively cute.
"You'll have to put up a good strong defense, Hagrid," said Hermione,
sitting down and laying a hand on Hagrid's massive forearm. "I'm sure
you can prove Buckbeak is safe."
"Won't make no diff'rence!" sobbed Hagrid. "Them Disposal devils,
they're all in Lucius Malfoy's pocket! Scared o' him! Ad if I lose the
case, Buckbeak --"
Hagrid drew his finger swiftly across his throat, then gave a great wail
and lurched forward, his face in his arms.
"What about Dumbledore, Hagrid?" said Harry.
"He's done more'n enough fer me already," groaned Hagrid. "Got enough on
his plate what with keepin' them dementors outta the castle, an' Sirius
Black lurkin' around --"
Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry, as though expecting him to
start berating Hagrid for not telling him the truth about Black. But
Harry couldn't bring himself to do it, not now that he saw Hagrid so
miserable and scared.
"Listen, Hagrid," he said, "you can't give up. Hermione's right, You
just need a good defense. You can call us as witnesses --"
"I'm sure I've read about a case of hippogriff-baiting," said Hermione
thoughtfully, "where the hippogriff got off I'll look it up for you,
Hagrid, and see exactly what happened."
Hagrid howled still more loudly. Harry and Hermione looked at Ron to
help them.
"Er -- shall I make a cup of tea?" said Ron.
Harry stared at him.
"It's what my mum does whenever someone's upset," Ron muttered,
shrugging.
At last, after many more assurances of help, with a steaming mug of tea
in front of him, Hagrid blew his nose on a handkerchief the size of a
tablecloth and said, "Yer right. I can' afford to go ter pieces. Gotta
pull meself together.....
Fang the boarhound came timidly out from under the table and laid his
head on Hagrid's knee.
"I've not bin meself lately," said Hagrid, stroking Fang with one hand
and mopping his face with the other. "Worried abou' Buckbeak, an' no one
likin' me classes --"
"We do like them!" lied Hermione at once.
"Yeah, they're great!" said Ron, crossing his fingers under the table.
"Er -- how are the flobberworms?"
"Dead," said Hagrid gloomily. "Too much lettuce."
"Oh no!" said Ron, his lip twitching.
"An' them dementors make me feel ruddy terrible an' all," said Hagrid,
with a sudden shudder. "Gotta walk past 'em ev'ry time I want a drink in
the Three Broomsticks. 'S like bein' back in Azkaban --"
He fell silent, gulping his tea. Harry, Ron, and Hermione watched him
breathlessly. They had never heard Hagrid talk about his brief spell in
Azkaban before. After a pause, Hermione said timidly, "Is it awful in
there, Hagrid?"
"Yeh've no idea," said Hagrid quietly. "Never bin anywhere like it.
Thought I was goin' mad. Kep' goin' over horrible stuff in me mind...
the day I got expelled from Hogwarts... day me dad died... day I had ter
let Norbert go...."
His eyes filled with tears. Norbert was the baby dragon Hagrid had once
won in a game of cards.
"Yeh can' really remember who yeh are after a while. An' yeh can' really
see the point o' livin' at all. I used ter hope I'd jus' die in me
sleep. When they let me out, it was like bein' born again, ev'rythin' I
came floodin' back, it was the bes' feelin' in the world. Mind, the
dementors weren't keen on lettin' me go."
"But you were innocent!" said Hermione.
Hagrid snorted.
"Think that matters to them? They don' care. Long as they've got a
couple o' hundred humans stuck there with 'em, so they can leech all the
happiness out of 'em, they don' give a damn who's guilty an' who's not."
Hagrid went quiet for a moment, staring into his tea. Then he said
quietly, "Thought o' jus' letting Buckbeak go... tryin' ter make him fly
away... but how d'yeh explain ter a hippogriff it's gotta go inter
hidin'? An' -an' I'm scared o' breakin' the law...." He looked up at
them, tears leaking down his face again. "I don' ever want ter go back
ter Azkaban."
The trip to Hagrid's, though far from fun, had nevertheless had the
effect Ron and Hermione had hoped. Though Harry had by no means
forgotten about Black, he couldn't brood constantly on revenge if he
wanted to help Hagrid win his case against the Committee for the
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. He, Ron, and Hermione went to the
library the next day and returned to the empty common room laden with
books that might help prepare a defense for Buckbeak. The three of them
sat in front of the roaring fire, slowly turning the pages of dusty
volumes about famous cases If marauding beasts, speaking occasionally
when they ran across something relevant.
"Here's something... there was a case in 1722... but the hippogriff was
convicted -- ugh, look what they did to it, that's disgusting --"
"This might help, look -- a manticore savaged someone in 1296, and they
let the manticore off -- oh -- no, that was only because everyone was
too scared to go near it."
Meanwhile, in the rest of the castle, the usual magnificent Christmas
decorations had been put up, despite the fact that hardly any of the
students remained to enjoy them. Thick streamers of holly and mistletoe
were strung along the corridors, mysterious lights shone from inside
every suit of armor, and the Great Hall was filled with its usual twelve
Christmas trees, glittering with golden stars. A powerful and delicious
smell of cooking pervaded the corridors, and by Christmas Eve, it had
grown so strong that even Scabbers poked his nose out of the shelter of
Ron's pocket to sniff hopefully at the air.
On Christmas morning, Harry was woken by Ron throwing his pillow at him.
"Oy! Presents!"
Harry reached for his glasses and put them on, squinting through the
semi-darkness to the foot of his bed, where a small heap of parcels had
appeared. Ron was already ripping the paper off his own presents.
'Another sweater from Mum... maroon again... see if you've got one.
Harry had. Mrs. Weasley had sent him a scarlet sweater with the
Gryffindor lion knitted on the front, also a dozen home-baked mince
pies, some Christmas cake, and a box of nut brittle. As he moved all
these things aside, he saw a long, thin package lying underneath.
"What's that?" said Ron, looking over, a freshly unwrapped pair of
maroon socks in his hand.
"Dunno..."
Harry ripped the parcel open and gasped as a magnificent, gleaming
broomstick rolled out onto his bedspread. Ron dropped his socks and
jumped off his bed for a closer look.
"I don't believe it," he said hoarsely.
It was a Firebolt, identical to the dream broom Harry had gone to see
every day in Diagon Alley. Its handle glittered as he picked it up. He
could feel it vibrating and let go; it hung in midair, unsupported, at
exactly the right height for him to mount it. His eyes moved from the
golden registration number at the top of the handle, right down to the
perfectly smooth, streamlined birch twigs that made up the tail.
"Who sent it to you?" said Ron in a hushed voice.
"Look and see if there's a card," said Harry.
Ron ripped apart the Firebolt's wrappings.
"Nothing! Blimey, who'd spend that much on you?"
"Well," said Harry, feeling stunned, "I'm betting it wasn't the
Dursleys."
I bet it was Dumbledore," said Ron, now walking around and around the
Firebolt, taking in every glorious inch. "He sent you the Invisibility
Cloak anonymously...."
"That was my dad's, though," said Harry. "Dumbledore was just Passing it
on to me. He wouldn't spend hundreds of Galleons on me. He can't go
giving students stuff like this --"
"That's why he wouldn't say it was from him!" said Ron. "In case some
git like Malfoy said it was favoritism. Hey, Harry" -- Ron gave a great
whoop of laughter -- "Malfoy! Wait till he sees you on this! He'll be
sick as a pig! This is an international standard broom, this is!"
"I can't believe this," Harry muttered, running a hand along the
Firebolt, while Ron sank onto Harry's bed, laughing his head off at the
thought of Malfoy. "Who -?"
"I know," said Ron, controlling himself, "I know who it could've been --
Lupin!"
"What?" said Harry, now starting to laugh himself "Lupin? Listen, if he
had this much gold, he'd be able to buy himself some new robes."
"Yeah, but he likes you," said Ron. "And he was away when your Nimbus
got smashed, and he might've heard about it and decided to visit Diagon
Alley and get this for you --"
"What d'you mean, he was away?" said Harry. "He was ill when I was
playing in that match."
"Well, he wasn't in the hospital wing," said Ron. "I was there, cleaning
out the bedpans on that detention from Snape, remember?"
Harry frowned at Ron.
"I can't see Lupin affording something like this."
"What're you two laughing about?"
Hermione had just come in, wearing her dressing gown and carrying
Crookshanks, who was looking very grumpy, with a string of tinsel tied
around his neck.
"Don't bring him in here!" said Ron, hurriedly snatching Scabbers from
the depths of his bed and stowing him in his pajama pocket.
But Hermione wasn't listening. She dropped Crookshanks onto Seamus's
empty bed and stared, open-mouthed, at the Firebolt.
"Oh, Harry! Who sent you that?"
"No idea," said Harry. "There wasn't a card or anything with it."
To his great surprise, Hermione did not appear either excited or
intrigued by the news. On the contrary, her face fell, and she bit her
lip.
"What's the matter with you?" said Ron.
"I don't know," said Hermione slowly, "but it's a bit odd, isn't it? I
mean, this is supposed to be quite a good broom, isn't it?"
Ron sighed exasperatedly.
"It's the best broom there is, Hermione," he said.
"So it must've been really expensive...."
"Probably cost more than all the Slytherins' brooms put together," said
Ron happily.
"Well... who'd send Harry something as expensive as that, and not even
tell him they'd sent it?" said Hermione.
"Who cares?" said Ron impatiently. "Listen, Harry, can I have a go on
it? Can I?"
"I don't think anyone should ride that broom just yet!" said Hermione
shrilly.
Harry and Ron looked at her.
"What d'you think Harry's going to do with it -- sweep the floor?" said
Ron.
But before Hermione could answer, Crookshanks sprang from Seamus's bed,
right at Ron's chest.
"GET -- HIM -- OUT -- OF -- HERE!" Ron bellowed as Crookshanks's claws
ripped his pajamas and Scabbers attempted a wild escape over his
shoulder. Ron seized Scabbers by the tail and aimed a misjudged kick at
Crookshanks that hit the trunk at the end of Harry's bed, knocking it
over and causing Ron to hop up and down, howling with pain.
Crookshanks's fur suddenly stood on end. A shrill, tint,, whistling was
filling the room. The Pocket Sneakoscope had become dislodged from Uncle
Vernon's old socks and was whirling and gleaming on the floor.
I forgot about that!" Harry said, bending down and picking up the
Sneakoscope. I never wear those socks if I can help it....
The Sneakoscope whirled and whistled in his palm. Crookshanks was
hissing and spitting at it.
"You'd better take that cat out of here, Hermione," said Ron furiously,
sitting on Harry's bed nursing his toe. "Can't you shut that thing up?"
he added to Harry as Hermione strode out of the room, Crookshanks's
yellow eyes still fixed maliciously on Ron.
Harry stuffed the Sneakoscope back inside the socks and threw it back
into his trunk. All that could be heard now were Ron's stifled moans of
pain and rage. Scabbers was huddled in Ron's hands. It had been a while
since Harry had seen him out of Ron's pocket, and he was unpleasantly
surprised to see that Scabbers, once so fat, was now very skinny;
patches of fur seemed to have fallen out too
"He's not looking too good, is he?" Harry said.
"It's stress!" said Ron. "He'd be fine if that big stupid furball left
him alone!"
But Harry, remembering what the woman at the Magical Menagerie had said
about rats living only three years, couldn't help feeling that unless
Scabbers had powers he had never revealed, he was reaching the end of
his life. And despite Ron's frequent conplaints that Scabbers was both
boring and useless, he was sure Ron would be very miserable if Scabbers
died.
Christmas spirit was definitely thin on the ground in the Gryffindor
common room that morning. Hermione had shut Crookshanks in her
dormitory, but was furious with Ron for trying to kick him; Ron was
still fuming about Crookshanks's fresh attempt to eat Scabbers. Harry
gave up trying to make them talk to each other and devoted himself to
examining the Firebolt, which he had brought down to the common room
with him. For some reason this seemed to annoy Hermione as well; she
didn't say anything, but she kept looking darkly at the broom as though
it too had been criticizing her cat.
At lunchtime they went down to the Great Hall, to find that the House
tables had been moved against the walls again, and that a single table,
set for twelve, stood in the middle of the room. Professors Dumbledore,
McGonagall, Snape, Sprout, and Flitwick were there, along with Filch,
the caretaker, who had taken off his usual brown coat and was wearing a
very old and rather moldy- looking tailcoat. There were only three other
students, two extremely nervous-looking first years and a sullen-faced
Slytherin fifth year.
"Merry Christmas!" said Dumbledore as Harry, Ron, and Hermione
approached the table. "As there are so few of us, it seemed foolish to
use the House tables.... Sit down, sit down!"
Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down side by side at the end of the table.
"Crackers!" said Dumbledore enthusiastically, offering the end of a
large silver noisemaker to Snape, who took it reluctantly and tugged.
With a bang like a gunshot, the cracker flew apart to reveal a large,
pointed witchs hat topped with a stuffed vulture.
Harry, remembering the boggart, caught Ron's eye and they both grinned;
Snape's mouth thinned and he pushed the hat toward Dumbledore, who
swapped it for his wizard's hat at once.
"Dig in!" he advised the table, beaming around.
As Harry was helping himself to roast potatoes, the doors of the Great
Hall opened again. It was Professor Trelawney, gliding toward them as
though on wheels. She had put on a green sequined dress in honor of the
occasion, making her look more than ever like a glittering, oversized
dragonfly.
"Sibyll, this is a pleasant surprise!" said Dumbledore, standing up.
"I have been crystal gazing, Headmaster," said Professor Trelawney in
her mistiest, most faraway voice, "and to my astonishment, I saw myself
abandoning my solitary luncheon and coming to join you. Who am I to
refuse the promptings of fate? I at once hastened from my tower, and I
do beg you to forgive my lateness...."
"Certainly, certainly," said Dumbledore, his eyes twinkling. "Let me
draw you up a chair --"
And he did indeed draw a chair in midair with his wand, which revolved
for a few seconds before falling with a thud between Professors Snape
and McGonagall. Professor Trelawney, however, did not sit down; her
enormous eyes had been roving around the table, and she suddenly uttered
a kind of soft scream.
I dare not, Headmaster! If I join the table, we shall be thirteen!
Nothing could be more unlucky! Never forget that when thirteen dine
together, the first to rise will be the first to die!"
"We'll risk it, Sibyll," said Professor McGonagall inpatiendy. "Do sit
down, the turkey's getting stone cold."
Professor Trelawney hesitated, then lowered herself into the empty
chair, eyes shut and mouth clenched tight, as though expecting a
thunderbolt to hit the table. Professor McGonagall poked a large spoon
into the nearest tureen.
"Tripe, Sibyll?"
Professor Trelawney ignored her. Eyes open again, she looked around once
more and said, "But where is dear Professor Lupin?"
"I'm afraid the poor fellow is ill again," said Dumbledore, indicating
that everybody should start serving themselves. "Most unfortunate that
it should happen on Christmas Day."
"But surely you already knew that, Sibyll?" said Professor McGonagall,
her eyebrows raised.
Professor Trelawney gave Professor McGonagall a very cold look.
"Certainly I knew, Minerva, 11 she said quietly. "But one does not
parade the fact that one is All- Knowing. I frequently act as though I
am not possessed of the Inner Eye, so as not to make others nervous.
"That explains a great deal," said Professor McGonagall tartly.
Professor Trelawney's voice suddenly became a good deal less misty.
"If you must know, Minerva, I have seen that poor Professor Lupin will
not be with us for very long. He seems aware, himself, that his time is
short. He positively fled when I offered to crystal gaze for him --"
"Imagine that," said Professor McGonagall dryly.
I doubt," said Dumbledore, in a cheerful but slightly raised voice,
which put an end to Professor McGonagall and Professor Trelawney's
conversation, "that Professor Lupin is in any immediate danger. Severus,
you've made the potion for him again?"
"Yes, Headmaster," said Snape. "W -- what?" said Harry, scrambling to
his feet. "Why?"
"It will need to be checked for jinxes," said Professor McGonagall. "Of
course, I'm no expert, but I daresay Madam Hooch and Professor Flitwick
will strip it down --"
"Strip it down?" repeated Ron, as though Professor McGonagall was mad.
"It shouldn't take more than a few weeks," said Professor McGonagall.
"You will have it back if we are sure it is jinx-free."
"There's nothing wrong with it!" said Harry, his voice shaking slightly.
"Honestly, Professor --"
"You can't know that, Potter," said Professor McGonagall, quite kindly,
"not until you've flown it, at any rate, and I'm afraid that is out of
the question until we are certain that it has not been tampered with. I
shall keep you informed."
Professor McGonagall turned on her heel and carried the Firebolt out of
the portrait hole, which closed behind her. Harry stood staring after
her, the tin of High-Finish Polish still clutched in his hands. Ron,
however, rounded on Hermione.
"What did you go running to McGonagall for?
Hermione threw her book aside. She was still pink in the face, but stood
up and faced Ron defiantly.
"Because I thought -- and Professor McGonagall agrees with me -- that
that broom was probably sent to Harry by Sirius Black!"
THE PATRONUS
Harry knew that Hermione had meant well, but that didn't stop him from
being angry with her. He had been the owner of the best broom in the
world for a few short hours, and now, because of her interference, he
didn't know whether he would ever see it again. He was positive that
there was nothing wrong with the Firebolt now, but what sort of state
would it be in once it had been subjected to all sorts of anti-jinx
tests?
Ron was furious with Hermione too. As far as he was concerned, the
stripping-down of a brand- new Firebolt was nothing less than criminal
damage. Hermione, who remained convinced that she had acted for the
best, started avoiding the common room. Harry and Ron supposed she had
taken refuge in the library and didn't try to persuade her to come back.
All in all, they were glad when the rest of the school returned shortly
after New Year, and Gryffindor Tower became crowded and noisy again.
Wood sought Harry out on the night before term started.
"Had a good Christmas?" he said, and then, without waiting for an
answer, he sat down, lowered his voice, and said, "I've been, doing some
thinking over Christmas, Harry. After last match, you know. If the
dementors come to the next one... I mean... we can't afford you to --
well --"
Wood broke off, looking awkward.
"I'm working on it," said Harry quickly. "Professor Lupin said he'd
train me to ward off the dementors. We should be starting this week. He
said he'd have time after Christmas."
"Ah," said Wood, his expression clearing. "Well, in that case -- I
really didn't want to lose you as Seeker, Harry. And have you ordered a
new broom yet?"
"No," said Harry.
"What! You'd better get a move on, you know -- you can't ride that
Shooting Star against Ravenclaw!"
"He got a Firebolt for Christmas," said Ron.
"A Firebolt? No! Seriously? A -- a real Firebolt?"
"Don't get excited, Oliver," said Harry gloomily. "I haven't got it
anymore. It was confiscated." And he explained all about how the
Firebolt was now being checked for jinxes.
"Jinxed? How could it be jinxed?"
"Sirius Black" Harry said wearily. "He's supposed to be after me. So
McGonagall reckons he might have sent it."
Waving aside the information that a famous murderer was after his
Seeker, Wood said, "But Black couldn't have bought a Firebolt! He's on
the run! The whole country's on the lookout for him! How could he just
walk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy a broomstick?"
"I know," said Harry, "but McGonagall still wants to strip it down --"
Wood went pale.
"I'll go and talk to her, Harry," he promised. "I'll make her see
reason.... A Firebolt... a real Firebolt, on our team... She wants
Gryffindor to win as much as we do.... I'll make her see sense. A
Firebolt..."
Classes started again the next day. The last thing anyone felt like
doing was spending two hours on the grounds on a raw January morning,
but Hagrid had provided a bonfire full of salamanders for their
enjoyment, and they spent an unusually good lesson collecting dry wood
and leaves to keep the fire blazing while the flame-loving lizards
scampered up and down the crumbling, white-hot logs. The first
Divination lesson of the new term was much less fun; Professor Trelawney
was now teaching them palmistry, and she lost no time in informing Harry
that he had the shortest life line she had ever seen.
It was Defense Against the Dark Arts that Harry was keen to get to;
after his conversation with Wood, he wanted to get started on his
anti-dementor lessons as soon as possible.
"Ah yes," said Lupin, when Harry reminded him of his promise at the end
of class. "Let me see... how about eight o'clock on Thursday evening?
The History of Magic classroom should be large enough.... I'll have to
think carefully about how we're going to do this.... We can't bring a
real dementor into the castle to practice on...."
"Still looks ill, doesn't he?" said Ron as they walked down the
corridor, heading to dinner. "What d'you reckon's the matter with him?"
There was a loud and impatient "tuh" from behind them. It was Hermione,
who had been sitting at the feet of a suit of armor, repacking her bag,
which was so full of books it wouldn't close.
"And what are you tutting at us for?" said Ron irritably.
"Nothing," said Hermione in a lofty voice, heaving her bag back over her
shoulder.
"Yes, you were," said Ron. "I said I wonder what's wrong with Lupin, and
you --"
"Well, isn't it obvious?" said Hermione, with a look of maddening
superiority.
"If you don't want to tell us, don't," snapped Ron.
"Fine," said Hermione haughtily, and she marched off.
"She doesn't know," said Ron, staring resentfully after Hermione. "She's
just trying to get us to talk to her again."
At eight o'clock on Thursday evening, Harry left Gryffindor Tower for
the History of Magic classroom. It was dark and empty when he arrived,
but he lit the lamps with his wand and had waited only five minutes when
Professor Lupin turned up, carrying a large packing case, which he
heaved onto Professor Binn's desk.
"What's that?" said Harry.
"Another boggart," said Lupin, stripping off his cloak. "I've been
combing the castle ever since Tuesday, and very luckily, I found this
one lurking inside Mr. Filch's filing cabinet. It's the nearest we'll
get to a real dementor. The boggart will turn into a dementor when he
sees you, so we'll be able to practice on him. I can store him in my
office when we're not using him; there's a cupboard under my desk he'll
like."
"Okay," said Harry, trying to sound as though he wasn't apprehensive at
all and merely glad that Lupin had found such a good substitute for a
real dementor.
"So..." Professor Lupin had taken out his own wand, and indicated that
Harry should do the same. "The spell I am going to try and teach you is
highly advanced magic, Harry -- well beyond ordinary Wizarding Level. It
is called the Patronus Charm."
"How does it work?" said Harry nervously.
"Well, when it works correctly, It conjures up a Patronus," said Lupin,
"which is a kind of anti- dementor -- a guardian that acts as a shield
between you and the dementor."
Harry had a sudden vision of himself crouching behind a Hagridsized
figure holding a large club. Professor Lupin continued, "The Patronus is
a kind of positive force, a projection of the very things that the
dementor feeds upon -- hope, happiness, the desire to survive -- but it
cannot feel despair, as real humans can, so the dementors can't hurt it.
But I must warn you, Harry, that the charm might be too advanced for
you. Many qualified wizards have difficulty with it."
"What does a Patronus look like?" said Harry curiously.
"Each one is unique to the wizard who conjures it."
"And how do you conjure it?"
"With an incantation, which will work only if you are concentrating,
with all your might, on a single, very happy memory."
Harry cast his mind about for a happy memory. Certainly, nothing that
had happened to him at the Dursleys' was going to do. Finally, he
settled on the moment when he had first ridden a broomstick.
"Right," he said, trying to recall as exactly as possible the wonderful,
soaring sensation of his stomach.
"The incantation is this --" Lupin cleared his throat. "Expecto
patronum!"
"Expecto patronum, " Harry repeated under his breath, "expecto
patronum."
"Concentrating hard on your happy memory?"
"Oh -- yeah --" said Harry, quickly forcing his thoughts back to that
first broom ride. "Expecto patrono -- no, patronum -- sorry -- expecto
patronum, expecto patronum"
Something whooshed suddenly out of the end of his wand; it looked like a
wisp of silvery gas.
"Did you see that?" said Harry excitedly. "Something happened!"
"Very good," said Lupin, smiling. "Right, then -- ready to try it on a
dementor?"
"Yes," Harry said, gripping his wand very tightly, and moving into the
middle of the deserted classroom. He tried to keep his mind on flying,
but something else kept intruding.... Any second now, he might hear his
mother again... but he shouldn't think that, or he would hear her again,
and he didn't want to... or did he?
Lupin grasped the lid of the packing case and pulled.
A dementor rose slowly from the box, its hooded face turned toward
Harry, one glistening, scabbed hand gripping its cloak. The lamps around
198
the classroom flickered and went out. The dementor stepped from the box
and started to sweep silently toward Harry, drawing a deep, rattling
breath. A wave of piercing cold broke over him --
"Expecto patronum!" Harry yelled. "Expecto patronum! Expecto --"
But the classroom and the dementor were dissolving.... Harry was failing
again through thick white fog, and his mother's voice was louder than
ever, echoing inside his head -- "Not Harry! Not Harry! please -- I'll
do anything!"
"Stand aside. Stand aside, girl!"
"Harry!"
Harry jerked back to life. He was lying flat on his back on the floor.
The classroom lamps were alight again. He didn't have to ask what had
happened.
"Sorry," he muttered, sitting up and feeling cold sweat trickling down
behind his glasses.
"Are you all right?" said Lupin.
"Yes..." Harry pulled himself up on one of the desks and leaned against
it.
"Here --" Lupin handed him a Chocolate Frog. "Eat this before we try
again. I didn't expect you to do it your first time; in fact, I would
have been astounded if you had."
"It's getting worse," Harry muttered, biting off the Frog's head. "I
could hear her louder that time -- and him -- Voldemort
Lupin looked paler than usual. ,
"Harry, if you don't want to continue, I will more than understand --"
"I do!" said Harry fiercely, stuffing the rest of the Chocolate Frog
into his mouth. "I've got to! What if the dementors turn up at our match
against Ravenclaw? I can't afford to fall off again. If we lose this
game we've lost the Quidditch Cup!"
"All right then... " said Lupin. "You might want to select 'other
memory, a happy memory, I mean, to concentrate on.... That one doesn't
seem to have been strong enough...."
Harry thought hard and decided his feelings when Gryffindor had won the
House Championship last year had definitely qualified as very happy. He
gripped his wand tightly again and took up his position in the middle of
the classroom.
"Ready?" said Lupin, gripping the box lid.
"Ready," said Harry; trying hard to fill his head with happy thoughts
about Gryffindor winning, and not dark thoughts about what was going to
happen when the box opened.
"Go!" said Lupin, pulling off the lid. The room went icily cold and dark
once more. The dementor glided forward, drawing its breath; one rotting
hand was extending toward Harry -
"Expecto patronum!" Harry yelled. "Expecto patronum! Expecto Pat --"
White fog obscured his senses... big, blurred shapes were moving around
him... then came a new voice, a man's voice, shouting, panicking --
"Lily, take Harry and go! It's him! Go! Run! I'll hold him off --"
The sounds of someone stumbling ftom a room -- a door bursting open -- a
cackle of high- pitched laughter --
"Harry! Harry... wake up...."
Lupin was tapping Harry hard on the face. This time it was a minute
before Harry understood why he was lying on a dusty classroom floor.
"I heard my dad," Harry mumbled. "That's the first time I've ever heard
him -- he tried to take on Voldemort himself, to give my mum time to run
for it...."
Harry suddenly realized that there were tears on his face mingling with
the sweat. He bent his face as low as possible, wiping them off on his
robes, pretending to do up his shoelace, so that Lupin wouldn't see.
"You heard James?" said Lupin in a strange voice.
"Yeah..." Face dry, Harry looked up. "Why -- you didn't know my dad, did
you?"
"I -- I did, as a matter of fact," said Lupin. "We were friends at
Hogwarts. Listen, Harry -- perhaps we should leave it here for tonight.
This charm is ridiculously advanced.... I shouln't have suggested
putting you through this...."
"No!" said Harry. He got up again. "I'll have one more go! I'm not
thinking of happy enough things, that's what it is.... Hang on...."
He racked his brains. A really, really happy memory... one that he could
turn into a good, strong Patronus...
The moment when he'd first found out he was a wizard, and would be
leaving the Dursleys for Hogwarts! If that wasn't a happy memory, he
didn't know what was.... Concentrating very hard on how he had felt when
he'd realized he'd be leaving Privet Drive, Harry got to his feet and
faced the packing case once more.
"Ready?" said Lupin, who looked as though he were doing this against his
better judgment. "Concentrating hard? All right -- go!"
He pulled off the lid of the case for the third time, and the dementor
rose out of it; the room fell cold and dark
'EXPECTO PATRONUM!" Harry bellowed. "EXPECTO PATRONUM!
EXPECTO PATRONUM!
"
The screaming inside Harry's head had started again -- except this time,
it sounded as though it were coming from a badly tuned radio -- softer
and louder and softer again -- and he could still see the dementor -- it
had halted -- and then a huge, silver shadow came bursting out of the
end of Harry's wand, to hover between him and the dementor, and though
Harry's legs felt like water, he was still on his feet -- though for how
much longer, he wasn't sure --
"Riddikulus!" roared Lupin, springing forward.
There was a loud crack, and Harry's cloudy Patronus vanished along with
the dementor; he sank into a chair, feeling as exhausted as if he'd just
run a mile, and felt his legs shaking. Out of the corner of his eye, he
saw Professor Lupin forcing the boggart back into the packing case with
his wand; it had turned into a silvery orb again.
"Excellent!" Lupin said, striding over to where Harry sat. "Excellent,
Harry! That was definitely a start!"
"Can we have another go? Just one more go?"
"Not now," said Lupin firmly. "You've had enough for one night. Here --"
He handed Harry a large bar of Honeydukes' best chocolate.
"Eat the lot, or Madam Pomfrey will be after my blood. Same time next
week?"
"Okay," said Harry. He took a bite of the chocolate and watched Lupin
extinguishing the lamps that had rekindled with the disappearance of the
dementor. A thought had just occurred to him.
"Professor Lupin?" he said. "If you knew my dad, you must've known
Sirius Black as well."
Lupin turned very quickly.
"What gives you that idea?" he said sharply.
"Nothing -- I mean, I just knew they were friends at Hogwarts too...."
Lupin's face relaxed.
"Yes, I knew him," he said shortly. "Or I thought I did. You'd better be
off, Harry, it's getting late."
Harry left the classroom, walking along the corridor and around a
corner, then took a detour behind a suit of armor and sank down on its
plinth to finish his chocolate, wishing he hadn't mentioned Black, as
Lupin was obviously not keen on the subject. Then Harry's thoughts
wandered back to his mother and father...
He felt drained and strangely empty, even though he was so full of
chocolate. Terrible though it was to hear his parents' last moments
replayed inside his head, these were the only times Harry had heard
their voices since he was a very small child. But he'd never be able to
produce a proper Patronus if he half wanted to hear his parents
again....
"They're dead," he told himself sternly. "They're dead and listening to
echoes of them won't bring them back. You'd better get a grip on
yourself if you want that Quidditch Cup."
He stood up, crammed the last bit of chocolate into his mouth, and
headed back to Gryffindor Tower.
Ravenclaw played Slytherin a week after the start of term. Slytherin
won, though narrowly. According to Wood, this was good news for
Gryffindor, who would take second place if they beat Ravenclaw too. He
therefore increased the number of team practices to five a leek. This
meant that with Lupin's anti-dementor classes, which in themselves were
more draining than six Quidditch practices, Harry had just one night a
week to do all his homework. Even so, he was showing the strain nearly
as much as Hermione, whose immense workload finally seemed to be getting
to her. Every night, without fail, Hermione was to be seen in a corner
of the common room, several tables spread with books, Arithmancy charts,
rune dictionaries, diagrams of Muggles lifting heavy objects, and file
upon file of extensive notes; she barely spoke to anybody and snapped
when she was interrupted.
"How's she doing it?" Ron muttered to Harry one evening as Harry sat
finishing a nasty essay on Undetectable Poisons for Snape. Harry looked
up. Hermione was barely visible behind a tottering pile of books.
"Doing what?"
"Getting to all her classes!" Ron said. "I heard her talking to
Professor Vector, that Arithmancy witch, this morning. They were going
on about yesterday's lesson, but Hermione can't 've been there, because
she was with us in Care of Magical Creatures! And Ernie McMillan told me
she's never missed a Muggle Studies class, but half of them are at the
same time as Divination, and she's never missed one of them either!"
Harry didn't have time to fathom the mystery of Hermione's impossible
schedule at the moment; he really needed to get on with Snape's essay.
Two seconds later, however, he was interrupted again, this time by Wood.
"Bad news, Harry. I've just been to see Professor McGonagall about the
Firebolt. She -- er -- got a bit shirty with me. Told m' I'd got my
priorities wrong. Seemed to think I cared more about winning the Cup
than I do about you staying alive. Just because I told her I didn't care
if it threw you off, as long as you caught the Snitch first." Wood shook
his head in disbelief. "Honestly, the way she was yelling at me... you'd
think I'd said something terrible... then I asked her how much longer
she was going to keep it. He screwed up his face and imitated Professor
McGonagall's severe voice. 'As long as necessary, Wood'... I reckon it's
time you ordered a new broom, Harry. There's an order form at the back
of Which Broomstick... you could get a Nimbus Two Thousand and One, like
Malfoy's got."
"I'm not buying anything Malfoy thinks is good," said Harry flatly.
January faded imperceptibly into February, with no change in the
bitterly cold weather. The match against Ravenclaw was drawing nearer
and nearer, but Harry still hadn't ordered a new broom. He was now
asking Professor McGonagall for news of the Firebolt after every
Transfiguration lesson, Ron standing hopefully at his shoulder, Hermione
rushing past with her face averted.
"No, Potter, you can't have it back yet," Professor McGonagall told him
the twelfth time this happened, before he'd even opened his mouth.
"We've checked for most of the usual curses, but Professor Flitwick
believes the broom might be carrying a Hurling Hex. I shall tell you
once we've finished checking it. Now, please stop badgering me."
To make matters even worse, Harry's anti-dementor lessons were not going
nearly as well as he had hoped. Several sessions on, he was able to
produce an indistinct, silvery shadow every time the boggart-dementor
approached him, but his Patronus was too feeble to drive the dementor
away. All it did was hover, like a semitransparent cloud, draining Harry
of energy as he fought to keep it there. Harry felt angry with himself,
guilty about his secret desire to hear his parents' voices again.
"You're expecting too much of yourself," said Professor Lupin, sternly
in their fourth week of practice. "For a thirteen-year-old wizard, even
an indistinct Patronus is a huge achievement. You aren't passing out
anymore, are you?"
I thought a Patronus would -- charge the dementors down or something,"
said Harry dispiritedly. "Make them disappear --"
"The true Patronus does do that," said Lupin. "But you've achieved a
great deal in a very short space of time. If the dementors put in an
appearance at your next Quidditch match, You will be able to keep them
at bay long enough to get back to the ground."
"You said it's harder if there are loads of them," said Harry.
"I have complete confidence in you," said Lupin, smiling. "Here --
you've earned a drink - something from the Three Broomsticks. You won't
have tried it before --"
He pulled two bottles out of his briefcase.
"Butterbeer!" said Harry, without thinking. "Yeah, I like that stuff!"
Lupin raised an eyebrow.
"Oh -Ron and Hermione brought me some back from Hogsmeade," Harry lied
quickly.
I see," said Lupin, though he still looked slightly suspicious. "Well --
let's drink to a Gryffindor victory against Ravenclaw! Not that I'm
supposed to take sides, as a teacher... " he added hastily
They drank the butterbeer in silence, until Harry voiced something he'd
been wondering for a while.
"What's under a dementor's hood?"
Professor Lupin lowered his bottle thoughtfully.
"Hmmm... well, the only people who really know are in no condition to
tell us. You see, the dementor lowers its hood only to use its last and
worst weapon."
"What's that?"
"They call it the Dementor's Kiss," said Lupin, with a slightly twisted
smile. "It's what dementors do to those they wish to destroy utterly. I
suppose there must be some kind of mouth under there, because they clamp
their jaws upon the mouth of the victim and -- and suck out his soul."
Harry accidentally spat out a bit of butterbeer.
"What -- they kill --?"
"Oh no," said Lupin. "Much worse than that. You can exist without your
soul, you know, as long as your brain and heart are still working. But
you'll have no sense of self anymore, no memory, no. .. anything.
There's no chance at all of recovery. You'll just exist. As an empty
shell. And your soul is gone forever... lost."
Lupin drank a little more butterbeer, then said, "It's the fate that
awaits Sirius Black. It was in the Daily Prophet this morning. The
Ministry have given the dementors permission to perform it if they find
him."
Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea of someone having their soul
sucked out through their mouth. But then he thought of Black.
"He deserves it," he said suddenly.
"You think so?" said Lupin lightly. "Do you really think anyone deserves
that?"
"Yes," said Harry defiantly. "For... for some things..."
He would have liked to have told Lupin about the conversation he'd
overheard about Black in the Three Broomsticks, about Black betraying
his mother and father, but it would have involved revealing that he'd
gone to Hogsmeade without permission, and he knew Lupin wouldn't be very
impressed by that. So he finished his butterbeer, thanked Lupin, and
left the History of Magic classroom.
Harry half wished that he hadn't asked what was under a dementor's hood,
the answer had been so horrible, and he was so lost in unpleasant
thoughts of what it would feel like to have your soul sucked out of you
that he walked headlong into Professor McGonagall halfway up the stairs.
"Do watch where you're going, Potter!"
"Sorry, Professor --"
"I've just been looking for you in the Gryffindor common room, Well,
here it is, we've done everything we could think of, and there doesn't
seem to be anything wrong with it at all. You've got a very good friend
somewhere, Potter...."
Harry's jaw dropped. She was holding out his Firebolt, and it looked as
magnificent as ever.
"I can have it back?" Harry said weakly. "Seriously?"
"Seriously," said Professor McGonagall, and she was actually smiling. "I
daresay you'll need to get the feel of it before Saturday's match, won't
you? And Potter -- do try and win, won't you? Or we'll be out of the
running for the eighth year. in a row, as Professor Snape was kind
enough to remind me only last night...."
Speechless, Harry carried the Firebolt back upstairs toward Gryffindor
Tower. As he turned a corner, he saw Ron dashing toward him, grinning
from ear to ear.
"She gave it to You? Excellent! Listen, can I still have a go on it?
Tomorrow?"
"Yeah... anything," said Harry, his heart lighter than it had been in a
month. "You know what -- we should make up with Hermione.... She was
only trying to help...."
"Yeah, all right," said Ron. "She's in the common room how working, for
a change --"
They turned into the corridor to Gryffindor Tower and saw Neville
Longbottom, pleading with Sir Cadogan, who seemed to be refusing him
entrance.
"I wrote them down!" Neville was saying tearfully. "But I must've
dropped them somewhere!"
"A likely tale!" roared Sir Cadogan. Then, spotting Harry and Ron: "Good
even, my fine young yeomen! Come clap this loon in irons. He is trying
to force entry to the chambers within!"
"Oh, shut up," said Ron as he and Harry drew level with Neville.
"I've lost the passwords!" Neville told them miserably. "I made him tell
me what passwords he was going to use this week, because he keeps
changing them, and now I don't know what I've done with them!"
"Oddsbodikins," said Harry to Sir Cadogan, who looked extremely
disappointed and reluctantly swung forward to let them into the common
room. There was a sudden, excited murmur as every head turned and the
next moment, Harry was surrounded by people exclaiming over his
Firebolt.
"Where'd you get it, Harry?"
"Will you let me have a go?" "Have you ridden it yet, Harry?"
"Ravenclaw'll have no chance, they're all on Cleansweep Sevens!"
"Can I just hold it, Harry?"
After ten minutes or so, during which the Firebolt was Passed around and
admired from every angle, the crowd dispersed and Harry and Ron had a
clear view of Hermione, the only person who hadn't rushed over to them,
bent over her work and carefully avoiding their eyes. Harry and Ron
approached her table and at last, she looked up.
"I got it back," said Harry, grinning at her and holding up the
Firebolt.
"See, Hermione? There wasn't anything wrong with it!" said Ron.
"Well -- there might have been!" said Hermione. "I mean, at least you
know now that it's safe!"
"Yeah, I suppose so," said Harry. "Id better put it upstairs."
"I'll take it!" said Ron eagerly. "I've got to give Scabbers his rat
tonic."
He took the Firebolt and, holding it as if it were made of glass,
carried it away up the boys' staircase.
"Can I sit down, then?" Harry asked Hermione.
"I suppose so," said Hermione, moving a great stack of parchment off a
chair.
Harry looked around at the cluttered table, at the long Arithmancy essay
on which the ink was still glistening, at the even longer Muggle Studies
essay ("Explain Why Muggles Need Electricity" and at the rune
translation Hermione was now poring over.
"How are you getting through all this stuff?" Harry asked her.
"Oh, well -- you know -- working hard," said Hermione. Close-up, Harry
saw that she looked almost as tired as Lupin.
"Why don't you just drop a couple of subjects?" Harry asked, watching