Payton Lee
2 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Five Star Affair
All rights reserved.
Copyright © 2003 Payton Lee
Cover Art copyright © Payton Lee
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without permission in writing from author.
For information address
Payton Lee
14122 Hunters Grove Drive
Orlando, FL 32828
Email: clancy49@lycos.com
http://semiramis.virtualave.net/payton/pl.htm
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, organizations or persons, living or dead is entirely coincidental and beyond the intent of the author.
ISBN
Printed in the United States of America
Payton Lee ?????????? 3
I dedicate this book to you, the reader. It is for you I write. My only hope is you enjoy sharing the movies of my mind.
4 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Five Star Affair
There was something left unfinished a long time ago.
“If things had been different”
Payton Lee ?????????? 5
Spring 1942
Chapter 1 ??
David Hall moved his glasses to his forehead and rubbed the bridge of his nose in thought. “My brother is demanding a lot. All the qualifications he requires are next to impossible.”
“Do you expect me to tell General Hall that?” Lieutenant Colonel Davidson grunted. “I don’t think the general knows about the old Roman law of not killing the messenger.”
“Fortunately for the both of us, I do have such a qualified person in this volunteer squad.” David motioned John Davidson to follow him to his solid oak file cabinet. He opened the second drawer from the top. Deftly his fingers filed through several files. “Here it is. The dossier of Kiley Burke.”
John took the manila file folder and paged slowly through the contents reading every record in it carefully. “This Burke appears to have all requirements. Superior grades, linguistic and fluent in Russian, German, Polish, French, and Italian, and Burke has had field experience as an ambulance driver during the Blitz. This Burke is a top student, has the highest clearance, administration training and can even manage portable typography.” John closed the folder and handed it back to David Hall. “Perfect! Send Burke to 30 Governor’s Square next week for orders. I’ll see to the induction myself.”
“John, in case you missed it in the dossier, Kiley Burke is a civilian in my volunteer corps.”
“Didn’t miss it. That fact is trivial and doesn’t matter. This Burke has just been inducted into service for His Majesty and Country. Duty is duty,” John countered. “Just see to it that Burke reports to me next week Tuesday.”
David Hall poured a glass of port, a luxury during the war, but it was offered to his important visitor from the high command. He poured himself a glass and asked quietly. “Is it classified to find out why my brother sent you to me for this super qualified person?”
6 ?????????? Five Star Affair
The colonel sipped the port inhaling its essence with relish. “The general knows you have the best intellects gathered here for your own service to the war effort.”
“How would my Tom know of my war effort?” David asked cocking a brow. His linguistics groups translated messages after they were Enigma decoded. It was as top secret as Enigma itself. David Hall’s particular linguistics group also translated intercepted Russian, French, and Italian messages, notes, and letters. Some letters were important but most were not. David had left his position as professor to give his expertise to the war effort.
“Only a few know of this place. As a need to know basis, General Hall was informed to find this person. Naturally he was thrilled to know it was operated by his own brother.”
“Can you tell me just who this person is and why this person requires one of mine?” David queried. “Or is that a need to know basis?”
“It is a need to know basis, but you do need to know,” John whispered. He functioned automatically to the soft voice whenever exchanging important information. This habit would protect him from anyone else overhearing a conversation. With this war and its secrets, everyone was a bit paranoid. This paranoia was with good reason and probable cause. “As you well know, when Japan attacked the Colonies and Germany and Italy declared war on them, they became part of this war.”
“They were a part of this war a long time ago. Most of our supplies are from the Americas.”
“Yes, but now they are fully involved. I believe we are going to win this bloody war with Yank money, personnel, and equipment behind us,” John quipped sipping more of the wonderful port.
“That doesn’t explain the need to take one of my people to Governor Square.”
“David, this came from the top. I do mean the top. Winston Churchill sent out this request himself,” John said seriously.
David suddenly felt a little weak kneed. He sat on the nearest chair and gulped his port. “Why?”
“The Prime Minister has informed his staff that the Colonies are sending one of their aides to study the European theatre. This aide is supposed to be given all assistance
Payton Lee ?????????? 7
necessary,” John explained. “Now you know. Let’s enjoy our port and send Kiley Burke to me next week.”
“I hate to lose Kiley, but anything for the war effort,” David conceded calmly. He felt halfway between proud and concerned. The fact the Colonies were sending one of the highest-ranking aides to England was disconcerting. The American’s were fighting on two oceans. They had lost most of their fleet in Pearl Harbor and could send the largest portion of their forces to the Pacific. Of course Churchill would want only the best for this emissary.
“Where is Kiley Burke?” Lieutenant Colonel demanded peering around the woman standing in front of him.
“Sir, I am Kiley Burke reporting as ordered.” She straightened her tie. It felt as if it were choking her. Today for her interview she had dressed in the proper uniform with skirt and stockings. Kiley’s head was aching because she had pulled her auburn hair so tightly into a straight bun. Her green eyes were hidden behind her reading glasses. Although she could see clearly without the spectacles, she used them for reading. Kiley read a great deal. History was her passion.
Standing uncomfortably, Kiley was well aware of Lieutenant Colonel Davidson’s scrutiny. Slowly she licked her lips. Kiley did not put on any makeup or lipstick that day. It was her intent to look as bookish and simple as possible. London was filled with RAF, Army, and Yank soldiers. Kiley didn’t hope or care for a quick lay in the hay or short lived affair. She loved her books. As far as she was concerned, Kiley didn’t want or need to encourage any male admiration. She had tried marriage once. It didn’t work for her and she had no intention of every trying it again. What Kiley needed in a relationship she was certain she would never find in any man alive today.
“Bloody Hell, I had no idea you were a woman,” Davidson’s voice boomed shattering the silence. “There is no time to find someone else. I just hope this is acceptable to the general.”
“General, sir?”
“Haven’t you been briefed on your assignment here at Governor’s Square?” Colonel Davidson barked.
Kiley was used to Army brass being short and gruff. His demeanor didn’t rattle her in the least. She was a civilian in a
8 ?????????? Five Star Affair
wartime nightmare. Service and duty had taken over her life. Kiley used all her education and knowledge in the wartime effort. “Sir, I was told to report to you for assignment as an administrative aide. Lord Hall explained that my expertise in linguistics, administration, and driving ability were needed here. That is what I was told.”
“You’ll just have to do,” Davidson grumbled.
Just have to do? Kiley ground her teeth. Whatever this duty was, as a linguistic, administrator, and historian, she was the best for the job. Bloody men! They all thought they were superior. Who was this general any way? Kiley continued to stand at attention.
“Have a seat Miss Burke,” Davidson pointed to the simple wooden chair in front of his desk. “I’ll have to brief you quickly. There is little time. General Hauser is arriving in three hours and you are to be the American staff’s aide while he’s here in London. You know London so well due to your duties as an ambulance driver during the Blitz.” He handed Kiley the schedule.
“You will adhere strictly to the generals schedule.”
“Generals?” Kiley noted the plural form.
“There will be two American generals. General Mark Hauser, and General Linden Matthew. Both are emissaries from the Colonies under direction of General George Marshall and the President Franklin Roosevelt. They are here to observe and report to the American President.” Colonel Davidson remained silent for several moments as Kiley read the schedule. “It is very important that everything goes well for his inspection. The very future of Britain is dependent upon this.”
“The schedule is quite busy and tight, but I can handle it,” Kiley bragged. She felt wonderful to be given an opportunity of service that would make a difference in this war. As much as she disliked the American presence in England Kiley knew they were needed to fight the Nazi. Kiley let herself daydream often of walking into Berlin and blowing Hitler to kingdom come with gun. Silence surrounded her in the Colonel’s office as she studied the schedule and dossiers of the Americans. “Isn’t Hauser a German name?” Kiley asked skeptically.
“Yes, those Yanks have mixed bloodlines from every country, but don’t you worry. This Hauser is hand picked and the
Payton Lee ?????????? 9
highest clearance,” Colonel Davidson remarked. “If I were you though, I wouldn’t bring up his pedigree.”
Kiley simply nodded and rose from the chair clutching the dossier in her hand.
“Your office will be on the third floor just outside the space we’ve made for the Americans,” Colonel Davidson stated. “I’ll show you. He rose from behind his ornate mahogany desk and plush heavily stuffed leather chair. His hands motioned her to the door, but his eyes were suddenly drawn to the calves of her legs. Those legs were long and shapely. The seams of her silk stockings followed shapely curves around small ankles moving up to her calves to hide beneath her woolen dark brown skirt. Too bad the rest of her doesn’t match those legs. He moved quickly in front of her. “Follow me.”
Kiley managed to keep up with the Colonel’s brisk pace. Soon they were in a barren room. There was a small desk with two large drawers on each side and small drawer in the center. Behind the desk was a simple straight back chair. A typewriter took center stage on the top of the desk. She noticed a steno pad, pencils, pens, and a stack of white paper beside the large typewriter.
“This is your office,” Colonel Davidson announced. “That door is the office General Hauser will be using. If he needs you for letters, memos, or translation he can call for you.” Davidson walked toward the connecting door and with his hand on the polished brass knob he opened the door.
Kiley inhaled in awe. The windows held heavy brocade draperies of deep crimson. There were two potted fern plants on either side of a large ornately carved cherry wood desk. In the front of the desk were two matched cherry wood captain chairs. Their seats were made of heavy crimson brocade with gold silken threads in leaf patterns. Under the desk was a gold, green, and red woven Turkish rug. This was a stark contrast to her simple office. Must be pretty important this American General Hauser.
“I’ll be leaving for luncheon at Connemara House,” Davidson informed.
“You won’t be here when the general arrives?” Kiley asked with surprise.
“No, I’m not that important,” Colonel Davidson chuckled. “General Hall will meet them.”
10 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“Well I haven’t much time to acquaint myself with the generals, I’d better get down to it,” Kiley sighed heavily and turned on her heels to return to the tiny barren little office. She sat down to read the necessary information on the Americans visit when she spotted a wooden file cabinet hidden behind the door. Rising quickly Kiley opened the top drawer. She was horrified to see files thrown in without order of any sort. This needed to be organized first. She threw herself into it and just before noon the file cabinet was organized. Her stomach was growling and decided to visit the nearest café for a dab of lunch. Grabbing her brown leather purse, Kiley walked down the steps to the front door.
A few moments before and American Packard stopped in front of Governor’s Square and a private opened the door for two generals to emerge and walk up the stairs to the entrance.
Kiley had made it too the bottom of the staircase when the generals entered. All the soldiers of the British Army in the room stood to attention and saluted stiffly. A corporal glared at Kiley and gestured for her to salute. “Oh very well,” she whispered to herself. She was a civilian but it seems the salute was like a command.
The two generals returned the salute and spoke to a major who had approached them. One of the generals nodded and walked briskly to the staircase where Kiley was standing.
Kiley was amazed at the swiftness of the tall generals gait. She stood stiff with her salute as the two men walked by her without a notice. As they mounted the stairs the generals managed to ignore Kiley completely. When they were out of sight Kiley released the breath she had been holding. Those Americans were rather handsome. It must be those lovely uniforms made of that fine cloth. One step toward the door found her thrust back against the wall as several Americans followed the generals and several of the lower ranking officers of the British Army followed them. Should she follow? Absolutely not! Those Americans had enough manpower surrounding them to last the rest of the day. Logic compelled her to soothe those hunger pangs and then find her way to that little cubbyhole upstairs.
Kiley ate a bite quickly and returned to her assigned hole in the wall. She was about to open the folder and read when her name
Payton Lee ?????????? 11
was bellowed in the next room. To Kiley it sounded like an Indian Water Buffalo ready to attack.
“Burke!” Mark Hauser shouted. “Goddammit, where the hell is that assistant? I need translations for this map.” Mark was not known for patience and bulldogged toward the door opening it as Kiley had reached for the knob. He thrust the door open with such force Kiley was knocked backwards. “Where the hell is that Burke?” he snarled at Kiley.
Kiley had just managed to balance and not fall down flat on her rump when the bull bellowed once more. Snapping to a quick salute she replied, “I’m Kiley Burke, sir.”
“You?” The raging bull snapped. He eyed the plain uniformed young woman. “Get in here. I need translations on this map,” Mark demanded in a lower tone. He turned and stomped back into the elaborate office and stopped in front of a map on the wall. His arms were quickly folded over his chest and he glared at the woman entering the room. When Kiley stood next to the map he pointed at various markings.
It was obvious to Kiley this map was taken from either Germany or a German spy. She quickly translated all the handwriting in the sections the general was interested in. She was suddenly left standing at the wall map wondering what she should do next.
A major spoke to Kiley and told her, “That will be all.”
“Thank you very much,” Kiley snapped testily. “Dismissed and all that!” She stomped back to her little room and drummed her fingers angrily on the desktop. “Bloody Americans. Pompous lot they are!”
“Burke?” A lieutenant asked popping his head into the room. “The general needs your service as a driver.”
“Where the Bloody Hell does his majesty wish to be driven?” Kiley asked sarcastically.
“Here, here!” the major interjected reprovingly.
“Oh very well,” Kiley growled. She grabbed her purse and went down the back stairs to the car. The two generals were waiting next to the car. Both looked a bit irritated that they were kept waiting. She sprang to open the door.
“You again?” Mark snarled. “London only has female drivers doubling as secretaries?” He bent and entered the car.
12 ?????????? Five Star Affair
The other general smiled at Kiley and greeted, “I’m General Matthew. Thank you.”
Kiley liked the middle-aged man immediately. How polite he was. She returned his smile closing the door. Jumping into the front seat and finding the keys in the ignition she started the car. “Where to sir?”
“Connemara Hotel,” Mark Hauser barked.
Kiley was dumbfounded. The Connemara Hotel was less than a block away. They could have walked. Didn’t they know petrol was rationed? Bloody Americans were too rich for her taste, and wasteful. With a surge, Kiley pulled the Packard forward sending her two generals flat against the seat. Lurching forward into traffic Kiley pulled in front of the hotel. Stopped the car and bolted to open the door for the generals. “Connemara Hotel,” she announced.
Mark and Linden looked at each other. They had no idea the hotel was so near. Mark was irritated at his own ignorance and decided to take it out on the woman driver. As he emerged he snarled, “ Where did you learn to drive Miss Burke?”
Before she could reply he turned to General Matthew. “We need to get a male driver.”
General Matthew grinned and winked at Kiley as he answered, “Sorry Mark, all drivers are assigned. This is it.”
Mark ignored his friend and stormed into the hotel. He announced himself to the concierge and was given the key to his rooms. The concierge told him his valet and aide were waiting in his room.
General Matthew addressed Kiley, “Good stiff upper lip and all that. You’re dismissed. Keep the car in front of Governor’s Square. We’ll walk there in the morning.”
“Thank you General Matthew,” Kiley smiled sweetly. She certainly liked this sweet man.
He smiled and followed General Hauser into the hotel.
Kiley drove the car around the block and returned it to its place in front of Governor’s Square. Once the car was parked she decided this had been a long enough day. Taking her purse she walked back to the flat she shared with two of her friends.
Payton Lee ?????????? 13
“He was back again,” Cindy teased when she opened the door. “No matter how dull you try to make yourself, he keeps coming back.”
“So sad for him,” Kiley sighed.
“He’s handsome. I’d go for him myself if he was interested.”
“Have at it,” Kiley groused. “If there is one thing I don’t need right now is another Bloody American!”
14 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Chapter 2 ??
Kiley untied her uncomfortable military heels. “These are abominations to a woman’s foot.” She was wiggling her toes when there was a knock at the door.
Cindy ran to answer it. Cindy was always such a bubbling optimist. Kiley looked at herself as a pragmatist. At twenty-six she had toured the continent and studied cultures. She graduated from college with top grades. Kiley had been through a horrible marriage, motored burnt bodies to a morgue, and lived through bombings and suffering that no one should have to bare. She smiled as a funny thought raced through her head. Which had been worse? Was it the bombing or was it her marriage?
Cindy giggling in her ear disrupted her thoughts, “I do hope you’ll share these.” Cindy thrust a box of treasured chocolates in Kiley’s face. “These are from Bob. He’s waiting downstairs to see you. Oh, I’m so envious. A handsome American Major just gah gah for you and you don’t even try to look lovely.”
“Men are bastards,” Kiley snarled. “Especially Americans as I an coming to learn.”
“He’s waiting to take you to dinner!” Cindy declared testily. “Don’t you Bloody tell me you’re too tired! You had an early day and he has Captain Turwald with him. You aren’t going to muck up my chances!” Cindy pulled her roommate up from the chair. “Get up, make your self presentable and don’t wear that Bloody ugly uniform! I’m going downstairs to keep the men occupied. I’m giving you twenty minutes.”
“But,” Kiley interjected.
“Don’t but me. This is my chance and by Gawd it’s a free meal. A real meal! These Americans are rich you know.”
Kiley pursed her lips angrily. “Very Well!”
Twenty minutes later Major Deacon caught his breath in his throat. Kiley Burke had her hair tied in a blue ribbon and the
Payton Lee ?????????? 15
auburn locks cascaded down her back. She was wearing a form fitting blue silk gown that revealed a luscious long neck. Matching Blue shoes finished her ensemble and he viewed those gorgeous legs he had first admired. This change was incredible and suddenly he felt jealous. Captain Turwald was staring as well.
Cindy followed the men staring and swore, “Damn!” Breaking away from Captain Turwald’s hand she stomped to Kiley. “You did this on purpose didn’t you? Dressing to your full beauty. I’ll be lucky to keep Dan with me tonight.”
Kiley smiled and whispered, “Yes I did. This will teach you to force me out when I don’t want to go. I’ve had my fill of Americans today with one bloody general.”
Major Deacon gently moved Cindy aside offering his arm to Kiley. “Dan is waiting for you Miss Stratford.” When Kiley had placed her hand on the major’s forearm he placed his hand on hers. “My God, why have you been hiding your spectacular beauty? I believe I will have to bring my sidearm next visit and use it to keep all the men away.”
“Thank you for the compliment,” Kiley replied. “The bookish Kiley is to prevent men from taking me as a female fluff and ignoring my knowledge and capabilities.”
“In that case I’m proud I was impressed by your capabilities and not your ankles alone.”
“Really?” Kiley asked in surprise. “You have been pursuing me for my mind?”
“Of course,” Bob grinned. “Your disguise has worked well enough to keep other interlopers away from my claim.”
Kiley rolled her eyes. “I’m hardly a claim. I am a woman.”
“Indeed you are!” Bob quipped. “A beautiful intelligent woman.”
Kiley’s solid protective emotional wall started to crumble.
All heads turned when Major Deacon entered the Hunter’s Red Restaurant. It was of the more elite restaurants of London and a favorite haunt of the American military brass.
One of the guests that evening were Mark Hauser and Linden Matthew. Both looked to the couple as they entered. The restaurant had suddenly become silent when Major Deacon entered
16 ?????????? Five Star Affair
with Kiley. Their military instincts had kicked in and followed the eyes to their focus.
“That dear friend is a typical problem in this country with our troops discipline. These British skirts parading around disrupting our officers thinking,” Mark groused. The beauty of the woman on the major’s arm took even his breath away. “Women, they are nothing but heartache and trouble.”
“You’re talking about your wife not all women,” Linden countered.
“We’re separated remember?” Mark reminded his friend. He was glad about it. Why he married her he asked himself over and over again. He came from a poor Arkansas farming family and she came from a wealthy California family. Yes, she had become a perfect military wife. She was too good of a military wife. With her father’s money, connections, and friends Martie had bullied him throughout his career. She made the choices for him. She wined, dined, and bullied everyone. He wanted a military career. Martie wanted wealth and power and made his life hell to get it. “The divorce isn’t going to happen too soon for me.”
“That’s if she divorces you,” Linden quipped. “I’m sure she’s heard about your promotion to Assistant Chief of Staff. That will impress Martie. She of all people will realize the implications of importance with that tag.”
“This is no time to depress me,” Mark growled. “Goddammit quit staring. Don’t fall into the female traps. I need you and your clear mind, Linden.”
“That little miss looks awfully familiar,” Linden stated thoughtfully stroking his chin.
“They all look alike,” Mark growled.
Linden arched his eyebrow. “I beg to differ with the Assistant Chief of Staff. I daresay they do not all look alike, thank God!”
“Eat!” Mark ordered in authority. “We have a lot discussed this evening.” He found even he couldn’t stop glancing at the auburn beauty eating dinner with the major. They appeared to be having a wonderful evening. Even Mark wasn’t certain what was eating him, but he wanted this fraternization stopped and damned if Linden wasn’t right. She looked familiar. He couldn’t place it. It didn’t matter. Women were trouble. He was acutely aware of that.
Payton Lee ?????????? 17
Early the next morning Kiley once again donned her bookish spinster look. The difference today was she chose slacks and comfortable boots over the constrictions of a girdle and tied shoes that pinched her toes.
Walking up the stairs at Governor’s Square the door opened suddenly. She didn’t have time to move as a solid body slammed into her. As she fell she heard.
“Goddammit, where the hell is that driver?”
Mark turned to the body he had slammed into. It was trying to rise. “Are you hurt, soldier?” he asked offering his hand.
Reaching for the help she grasped his offered hand to rise.
“You!” General Hauser stormed. “Where the hell have you been? Do you always sleep in? It won’t do as my driver. I want you here at 7:00 sharp since you are the only driver option I appear to have.” Wasn’t that typical of a woman? His wife was just like that. Martie barely rose before noon.
Shocked at the general’s change in demeanor she was quite angry herself. He cared for a soldier, but treated her rudely because she was a woman. “Yes sir!” Kiley snapped angrily rising to a stiff salute. She bounded to the general’s car and opened the door. Standing stiffly and saluting once more as General Hauser approached her she bit into her lip with temper.
“Do quit saluting Miss Burke,” Mark growled. “You do it quite badly.”
“I’m a civilian sir,” Kiley hissed. “My education did not include salute 101.” She didn’t think the general heard her. She hadn’t realized the window had been rolled down.
Mark’s scowl deepened and pushed back into the car’s seat cushion. When Kiley entered the car he barked impatiently. “What are you waiting for Burke?”
Beneath the calm of her voice lie surging storms. “You haven’t told me where to drive, SIR,” Kiley replied enunciating the word sir.
Linden interceded immediately recognizing the sarcastic retort from Kiley. “Montgomery’s headquarters, please.”
“Yes sir,” Kiley replied softly. This General Matthew is a true gentleman. Putting the car into gear she took shortcuts to the headquarters and delivered the generals in record time. Kiley
18 ?????????? Five Star Affair
bolted from the car and opened the door for the generals. She did not salute.
Several hours later they returned to the car. Kiley jumped out and opened the car doors. Although she thought it would be impossible, General Hauser returned in with a worse mood. As she motored toward London his wrath seethed from his mouth.
“Well? What are you waiting for?” Mark barked to Kiley.
“A destination, sir?” Kiley replied sarcastically. This general was next to impossible.
“Connemara!” Mark snarled. He had no patience at the moment, especially to be corrected.
“Would that be Connemara in Erin, or Connemara the hotel in London,” Kiley responded. “There are of course…”
Mark cut her off. “Hotel, Burke!” He was red faced with fury. These British were an insufferable lot.
“Yes sir,” Kiley replied far too sweetly.
Linden clamped his teeth shut to prevent a belly laugh from escaping.
Incognizant of Kiley’s sarcasm Mark started a tirade. “Goddammit, do you believe that man? Did you believe that savage remark?” Marks spewed out angrily. “I should have told the bastard we won that war.” He slammed his back against the seat so hard the big car jolted a bit.
“He is a bit self centered,” Linden agreed.
“A bit? That man is so ego centered Freud would take a century to examine his mind,” Mark snarled. “That idiot doesn’t understand the importance of allied front. We need every man available working together as allies to defeat the axis.”
“And every woman,” Kiley whispered. She hadn’t realized she had even said it loud enough for the generals to hear.
“What was that, Burke?” Mark snapped.
It was too late to retract her thoughts. “Every woman, sir. We need every man and woman’s efforts to defeat the Nazi and Axis powers.”
Mark snorted, “What do women have to do with war, Burke?”
“Everything! In every war women have played important roles. In our history we can name Queen Phillippa who gathered an army and defeated Scotland. She also captured Scotland’s king
Payton Lee ?????????? 19
for her husband King Edward. There is Joan of Arc. She gave her life for her country. In your own country there have been many, An Apache named Lozen baffled your soldiers.”
Mark and Linden looked at each other. They had never heard of Lozen. Linden mouthed Lozen’s name with question. Mark shrugged his shoulders.
“During the Civil War you had your Clara Barton. We’ve spied for our countries, carried arms and battled on the fields with men. We’ve carried banners, nursed, and cared for soldiers on the battlefield under fire. Yes General, women! When I drove ambulances during the Blitz I carried the charred burned remains of hundreds of women. Some were clutching their children in a vain attempt to spare their lives. Our women carry the incendiary bombs away when possible. Our women captained many of the crafts that carried our troops from Dunkirk. These are only a few examples.”
Mark sat back further into the seat. For the rest of the short trip back to London he remained silent. He had thought he was an expert in History. He realized even he had much to learn and it was fascinating to contemplate a different point of view.
Linden remained silent back to London as well. He bit his lips so his chuckles wouldn’t escape. Mark Hauser was an arrogant man and Linden appreciated his come up pence from this Kiley Burke. He smiled as they approached Connemara Hotel. He really liked this woman and as for the General? Mark needed a taste of the humble pie she dished out to him. If Mark Hauser were to be successful in his mission to unite the allies, he would need to learn to listen as well as order. Linden knew many minds help make a good decision, but it takes one solid mind to filter through the parts to make a sum. Hauser was that man, but he needed to learn to listen to other council. He could report to Oscar Newhall that Hauser was the man for the command of the European Theater. Yes, he liked this Kiley Burke.
Stopping in front of the Connemara Hotel, Kiley bolted from the car as soon as she turned of the engine and set the emergency brake. She opened the door, but did not salute.
Linden stood to the side and waited a moment after General Hauser left the car and walked up the stairs. He leaned over to Kiley and spoke quietly. “Excellent history lesson. I believe we both learned a great deal. Thank you, Kiley.” Linden whispered
20 ?????????? Five Star Affair
into Kiley’s ear, “We breakfast at 6:00 in the morning and leave for the office promptly at 6:45. We’ll have several meetings with the RAF, British Army Brass, Navy, and more. We’ll be driving to those meetings. Make certain you eat and be here no later than 6:45 in the morning.”
Kiley felt the general’s warm breath as he gave her those instructions. She responded in spite of herself, “I thought you wanted a new male driver.”
“No my dear, he wants a male driver. We need you and he needs you more than he realizes,” General Matthew quipped. “By the way Burke, keep the pants. They’re more practical.” With those words he left her and entered the hotel.
Kiley smiled after General Matthew. “Such a nice man,” she said to herself. It was getting dark and she wanted to get back to the flat. She was tired.
Payton Lee ?????????? 21
Chapter 3
Kiley was actually happy to see Bob Deacon waiting for her by the flat. Her nerves were taut and she would appreciate a nice hot meal at a nice restaurant.
Deacon waited while Riley changed. This time she didn’t dress as flamboyantly, but still projected an attractive figure.
The next few weeks were easier for Kiley. General Hauser no longer barked for her when he needed linguistics or translation. Instead he sent his aide into the next office for her. General Matthew ordered Hauser’s aide to give Kiley a daily schedule of their planned meetings and tours. On occasion she would scribe conversations on General Matthews request giving Hauser’s stenographer a reprieve.
General Hauser never mentioned obtaining a male driver again. The humility he tasted was bitter, but it made him start to think of his own frailty that he needed to conquer. He was able to listen to other’s voices. Contemplating and analyzing the information offered, he was capable of offering Oscar Newhall a plan of operation in the European Theater. This eye opener was all due to a bright and bookish British subject that drove his car. Mark actually felt a bit guilty for his initial treatment of her. Of course this was a lesson she would never know she gave.
Major Bob Deacon was waiting for Kiley every night. She found she enjoyed being with him. He was kind and considerate of her every wish and comfort. He didn’t seem overwhelmed by her intelligence. Instead they engaged in many intellectual conversations over dinner and wine. Before his commission in the Army he had been a Professor of Sociology at a small college in Nebraska.
22 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Kiley enjoyed these evenings. It was a blessing from the strain of the war. She was relieved when the schedule for the day included transport of the generals to a military plane that would take them back to Washington. Perhaps now she could return to her favorite world of books and linguistics with Lord David Hall.
Armed with briefcases the two generals entered the military transport and returned to Washington.
When Mark Hauser deplaned from Bolling Field there was an unexpected and unwelcome visitor waiting for him. He had no sooner set one foot on the ground when Martie bolted from behind the fence and ran into her husband’s arms. Camera flashes nearly blinded him. The military airport always had new reporters nearby to catch military personnel or brass in photographs. With his current position, there was simply nothing he could do.
Martie watched the ramp rolled to the open plane door. Several men descended as she watched carefully. She saw Linden and behind him stood Mark with briefcase in hand. His uniform was still crisp. “If you think you’re going to get away from now that you’ve finally made it. You are very wrong Mark Hauser,” Martie mumbled quietly to herself. With a shout she ran toward her estranged husband, “Mark! Mark my darling!” She quickly ensconced herself in his arms.
Before Mark knew what actually hit him, his estranged wife was kissing his cheeks and lips like a starved woman at a feast.
“My darling, I’ve missed you so much,” Martie resounded for everyone within twenty feet to hear.
Mark bent his head and whispered in her ear, “What the Hell do you think you’re doing?”
In a voice barely above a whisper so she could be heard above the airport’s noise Martie replied, “Image is everything darling. Your image is critical at this time. General Newhall and I had a long conversation about this.”
Mark was furious. He knew very well that Newhall liked Martie. She was a perfect army wife in his eyes and Newhall was his superior. He also knew that Newhall often scathed the commander of the Pacific front for his divorce and remarriage to a younger woman. Mark felt trapped. He had been hoping Martie would have used her father’s money and pushed the divorce
Payton Lee ?????????? 23
through. What was she up to now? Mark took Martie’s arm none to gently and ushered her into the military car waiting for him.
Linden knew of the marital discord, but both men knew better than to say anything that the young driver might overhear. Linden also believed this was a private matter that Mark would prefer to handle in private. The driver was told to drive immediately to General Newhall. Mrs. Hauser should be dropped off at the hotel of her choice.
It was early into the morning that Mark Hauser returned to his small apartment in Washington. He considered himself lucky to have this little private haven. Here he could curl up with his books. He loved history and kept his favorite books there leaving everything else in the house he walked away from six months ago. Mark tossed his hat on the small sofa in the tiny living room. Quickly he removed his jacket and tie. He removed his shoes and socks placing them neatly under the coffee table next to the sofa. His jacket and tie were placed neatly on the sidearm of the sofa. Unbuttoning his shirt he entered the small bathroom. It was in that bathroom he removed his shirt, undid his brass buckled belt, and unzipped his pants. Comfortable at last when he was down to his tee shirt and boxers, Mark walked to his bedroom. He was exhausted and needed sleep. “Goddammit!” Mark shouted as he reached for the covers in the dark and found a body under it.
“Mark, you simply must stop that foul language,” Martie murmured sleepily.
“Goddammit, what are you doing here?” Mark demanded.
“Darling, I thought you would be pleased that I’ve changed my mind about the divorce. Your public image is sooo important now,” Martie cooed.
“Martie, I’m too damned tired to deal with this now, but I want this divorce. I want this hell we call a marriage ended,” Mark stated angrily. He took the top quilt from the bed and stormed into the living room to sleep on the sofa.
Mark rose early. Martie rarely rose before ten. He wrote a letter instructing her to find an apartment of her own or return to California and her parents.
Mark took no chances for several days. He billeted himself at the Washington headquarters and was available at any hour. It was a wise decision because Martie had taken over his tiny little
24 ?????????? Five Star Affair
apartment and refused to move out for propriety and public image. She consistently reminded him of how important it was for the Commander of European Operations to project a proper American mom’s apple pie squeaky-clean image. Mark continued to press the divorce until General Newhall intervened and told him to wait. Mark was exasperated by his superior’s insistence that all marriages get rocky but survive.
Mark maintained his sanity by concentrating on his work. His report on the state of readiness for European theater was presented to General Newhall. Options and alternatives were debated endlessly. Meetings happened morning, noon, and night. One day Mark was called for a meeting with the President and Newhall.
To Mark’s surprise his plans for invasion were discussed by Franklin Roosevelt and Newhall, and Winston Churchill.
“We’ve agreed upon your plan for one man to be in Charge of American forces, Mark,” The President stated. “We’ve also decided on the person you recommended to be the sole commander of the American Forces in Europe.” The President let silence hang in the air. “General Newhall and I agree on the choice.”
Mark looked from the President to his superior. He had recommended a member of the staff, General Patrick O’Riley.
A familiar voice suddenly boomed from behind him. “We are all agreed on General Mark Hauser.”
Mark choked. It was Winston Churchill. Suddenly the responsibility of the future of the free world rested on his shoulders and his shoulders alone.
“Do you want the job, Mark?” the President asked.
Mark found himself nodding and with a shaky voice he answered, “Yes sir. Yes sir, I do.” If nothing else he was confident of his plan.
“Good,” General Newhall said. “You’ll leave in a week for London and assume command of the European Theater. Congratulations, Mark. You’ve just received your third star.”
Mark was stunned, but he through himself into his new rank and responsibility. There would be many changes in the command overseas. The first to go would be General Lane. He was ineffective and certainly held no respect from an undisciplined troop. In only a few days Mark had convinced General Newhall to remove Lane and place General Randall Jones as his adjutant.
Payton Lee ?????????? 25
Mark was determined to bring discipline back to the American troops in the British Aisles and he knew exactly where to begin. Fraternization with the British civilian population would come to a screeching halt. He would present a image as Martie put it. It would be an image of strength, capability, and proper military manner. Duty, Honor, and Country!
The next week he was surprised at his military billet by his daughter, Debbie.
“Dad, I’m so proud!” she bubbled and kissed her father. “Radcliffe gave me a special holiday so I could see you before you left for England. Imagine, my dad is the commander of the armed forces in Europe. I’ll be ever so popular at school.”
If anything wonderful came out of his marriage to Martie, it was Deborah. She was smart, beautiful, and the joy of his life.
“Mum met me at the train station. She’s waiting for us at your apartment. Is that swell with you?” Deborah was aware of the problems in her parent’s marriage. Even though her mother had assured her in the car that her parents were reconciling, Deborah was doubtful. Her father’s pained look confirmed her suspicion. “It’s alright Dad. We’ll just project this perfect family like we’ve always done and you can come back here. I just want to spend as much time as I can with you.”
“Sweet pea, for you I will enter the jaws of hell. We’ll put on the pretense. Just so I can spend time with you,” Mark promised. He hugged his daughter. Strong emotions engulfed him and he squelched the tears that shimmered on his eyes.
Deborah took his hand and led him out to the car. For his last few days he and Martie put on an exhibition worthy of an academy award.
Deborah and Martie saw him board the flight to England. He hugged and kissed his daughter farewell. He allowed Martie to embrace him. On that embrace Mark growled quietly, “Get that divorce Martie, and get it done with now. I’ve attorneys ready to handle it in my absence.”
Martie kissed her fingers and touched them to Mark’s lips. It was strictly a gesture for the photographers. When Mark turned to board the plane he heard Martie reply, “Not on your life soldier!” She knew he couldn’t do or say anything. “Write to me everyday like you promised my love,” Martie shouted for benefit
26 ?????????? Five Star Affair
of reporters and photographers. Tears suddenly flowed from her eyes and she sought the shelter of General Newhall’s arms.
“That Martie is a real actress,” Mark’s new adjutant, General Randall Jones quipped.
“She belongs on the Hollywood Cinema for certain,” Mark agreed.
“She doesn’t project the image of a woman obtaining a divorce from a neglectful husband,” Jones teased lightheartedly.
“Daddy is going to benefit from my new star,” Mark sighed. “Once Daddy doesn’t benefit anymore I’m sure my divorce will go smoothly. But Randy, my personal life ends here. We’ve got a job to do!”
“Yes Mark, that we do!”
Payton Lee ?????????? 27
Chapter 4
Unfortunately for Kiley she was retained by Colonel Hall’s staff and worked every day for the next two months transcribing, translating, and driving for Colonel Hall. While driving a visiting American Colonel to a private party, Kiley heard the news of Hauser’s promotion. He was given command of all American Forces in the European Theater and promoted to a three star general. “We’re in for it now,” she said silently.
Returning to work after a three-day holiday she was met at the door by Major Bob Deacon. He embraced her and pulled her to the side. “I’ve something important to say and I have to say it now. I haven’t much time.”
Kiley swallowed hard. She had a sick feeling in the pit of her stomach what was coming next. How could she explain to Bob she liked him, but wanted absolutely no romantic or marriage ties to muck up her life.
“Don’t answer me yet. Think on it for a day or two,” Bob spewed out quickly. “Kiley, I love you. Marry me.”
Kiley opened her mouth to give an answer. Bob quickly put his finger on her lips. “Don’t answer me yet! I can’t be seen with you in public anymore. Hauser as issued the order,” he hesitated. “No Fraternization! No Fraternization with the female gender.”
“Good God!” Kiley exclaimed not for herself but her friends, especially Cindy who was quite happy with Captain Dan Turwald. Those two had been discussing marriage. “Who gave this order?”
“The Commander of the European Theater,” Bob laughed. “You know, the one you admire so much.”
“Hauser?” Kiley asked in shock. “He’s back?”
28 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“Yes, and leading the whole shebang,” Bob replied. “Got to run now. I have a meeting upstairs with the staff.”
“Good Lord you’d better leave before the general arrives,” Kiley chuckled with humor. “He’d lop off your head for fraternizing with this humble British servant.”
Bob Deacon had no sooner left than Kiley spotted Hauser and two men walking toward her. She ran up the stairs to hide in her office.
Kiley sat on the straight back chair and went through her inbox looking for the day’s schedule. Colonel Hall always had his aide put it there the night before. She found nothing. Shuffling through the papers once more, she still found nothing. Kiley heard the general and his staff walk up the stairs to his office. “Bloody Yanks. They sound like a herd of Elephants walking up here.” When the door opened to the general’s office she heard the voices. Kiley decided to find Colonel Hall and obtain her scheduled duties personally.
“Has anyone found Burke?” Mark Hauser queried his staff.
“Yes sir,” Captain Hawker responded. “Burke had taken a three day holiday to visit her mother and will report for duty this morning.”
“Get her,” Mark barked.
“Sir, we don’t know if she’s arrived yet?”
“Have you checked her office?” Mark queried the captain. His voice was dripping with irritation and sarcasm. “I won’t be late for another conference. Do you understand me?”
“Yes sir.” The captain saluted and walked briskly to the door of the adjoining office. Walking into the little room he looked around. Kiley had already left and was downstairs trying to locate Colonel Hall.
The captain came back and reported, “She’s not there, General sir.”
Packing his briefcase Mark was seething with anger. This was getting irritating. He had an American male driver that was lost all the time both inside and outside London. Mark had been late everyday for every meeting since his return three days ago. His temper was at its explosive level. As much as he hated to admit it, that wisp of a woman was the best damn driver in England. “Then find her, Goddammit! She has to be around her
Payton Lee ?????????? 29
somewhere.” If Mark had to have that same corporal as his driver one more day he would bust him lower than a private and the rest of his duty overseas would be cleaning latrines. “If she isn’t here, go to her billet and get her.”
The captain ran from the room.
“Burke is a civilian, Mark,” Randall reminded the General. “It may not be a good idea to drag her screaming from her bed.”
“She’s still in service and I have need of her services,” Mark snapped. “Burke may be a woman, but the chit knows her way around England. I need that, England needs that, and the ally war effort needs that!”
“Speaking of Allies,” Randall chuckled. “Burke is lend lease and it might behoove you to begin your politics as making her your ally.”
Mark raised his brow and shot General Jones a look that would slice a normal man in two. “Randy, shut up!”
Sean Ryan followed the captain down the stairs. He knew what Burke looked like and he knew Mark Hauser’s mood. He had been Hauser’s personal aide for over ten years. Sean guessed correctly that Hauser would not tolerate another delay or being late for a meeting. Hauser was meticulous and prompt. He spotted Kiley in the hall behind the main office. She appeared to be asking for someone. Sean ignored the captain and sprinted across the room. He called for Kiley by name. “Kiley Burke?”
Kiley heard her name and spun around to the voice. “Yes?” She responded automatically and knew it was not the General.
“General Hauser has sent for you,” Sean stated reaching her side.
“Tell the General I haven’t yet found my schedule. I may be needed elsewhere.”
“Colonel Hall has transferred you to our staff, ma’am,” Sean informed politely doffing his hat. “You’ll find your schedule upstairs. General Hauser needs you to drive for him.”
“What?” Kiley stated with surprise more than question. “General Hauser hates women drivers. He did nothing but complain the entire time I was assigned to him.”
“He may have had a change of heart,” Sean excused.
“Heart? You mean he actually has one?” Kiley sneered. “I thought his body ran on ice.”
“Please ma’am,” Sean gave into pleading.
30 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“It looks like you know what my assignment is,” Kiley capitulated. “For King and Country you know.”
Clutching her purse tightly against her shoulder she entered General Hauser’s office to face the hot-tempered Commander of Allied Forces. She spotted Bob talking to a Naval Officer. She would come to know that man as Harry Durham. Kiley remembered the new fraternization rule and didn’t try to catch Bob’s attention. Instead she noticed a tall major approach her.
“Morning Burke, here is the general’s schedule,” he said handing her a sheet of paper. “I’m Major Dallas Stern. I’ll be preparing the general’s schedule for you ever day.”
Kiley’s Irish temper exploded. “Bloody Unlikely!”
Mark Hauser and everyone in the room turned to look at her.
“I beg your pardon?” Dallas gulped.
“You heard me! Bloody Unlikely! I’m a civilian. I am not in any British military service, much less a Bloody Colonist Army!”
Hauser’s orders, command, or aides had never been questioned before. As a commander he needed to support his aides and let this mere woman know just who was in charge. “Miss Burke, although you are a woman you seem to be the only available driver with knowledge of London and England. It is imperative for the war effort that I arrive safely and on time for meetings, reviews, and inspections.”
Kiley didn’t hear anything except the woman blurb. “As a mere woman I should be flattered to be so underhandedly complimented, but I am not a female to be trifled with or debased. My driving expertise is a service that should not be equated with a gender. You Colonists seem to have a problem appreciating any of your women’s talents.
“Miss Burke, there is no need to get into a gender war here,” Mark stated attempting a more placid tone.
“Don’t placate me General Hauser,” Kiley bit back. “It’s no wonder you Bloody Colonists didn’t give your women equal rights and the vote until well after the British Crown.” Kiley snapped the paper from Stern’s hand and looked at it and then her watch. “We have plenty of time General. I’ll be at the car waiting for you. It should take me only ten minutes to take you to your meeting with the Prime Minister at Downing Street.” With those
Payton Lee ?????????? 31
words leaving her mouth she spun around on her heels and marched out of the office and down the stairs.
Bob was dumbfounded. He couldn’t believe what Kiley had just done. She had dressed down the military commander of American Forces. He allowed a smile of pride to slide across his face. He could never pull off what she just had.
Mark watched Kiley march away from his office. He couldn’t help but admire the guts of a woman who had just told him off. That also took courage to retaliate against an American General that was in supreme command under orders of the President of the United States. He also admired the woman for her knowledge of history, his favorite subject. It might be interesting to compare notes with her at some quiet time.
Mark finished filling his briefcase and buckled it. He started toward the door. Randall Jones followed him on his heels and whispered, “For God’s sake Mark, we don’t need anymore war fronts. Try to be a little more political with our driver. She isn’t one of ours you know.”
“Maybe I should make her one of ours. A little discipline would do her some good,” Mark chortled.
Randall rolled his eyes and followed the general to the car.
Kiley was waiting at the car and had the door open for the generals when they stepped out of the building. She did not salute and her face was stoic not revealing her feelings.
Several hours later the general emerged from his meeting. His mood was better since this meeting went well. Seeing Kiley he felt a twinge of guilt for his rude treatment of her. “Would you care to join General Jones and I for dinner Miss Burke?”
Without twitching or moving a muscle Kiley replied, “Thank you ever so much for your warm and kind invitation Mon General, but I already have plans for the evening.”
“Break them,” Hauser ordered not thinking of how callous this order sounded.
“I am your driver, not a slave,” Kiley related dryly.
“Look, Miss Burke,” Mark explained nearly choking. “I would like to make a truce with you. We’ve started off on the wrong foot. You are an excellent driver. I’m sorry I indicated anything else. I apologize.”
32 ?????????? Five Star Affair
This apology was to good to be true and Kiley didn’t want to make light of it or take it too seriously. She drew back her acerbic tongue and merely said, “Thank you for your apology.”
“You’re welcome. I thought to have dinner at the Hunter’s Red Restaurant. Have you ever eaten there before?”
“Oh yes, several times. A certain major takes me there on occasion.”
“One of yours?” Mark asked for no reason other than conversation. At least that’s what he told himself.
“Actually one of yours,” Kiley retorted. “A sweet kind American Major that doesn’t bark, yell, or criticize me at any time. We actually have quiet conversations.”
Mark reached deep inside himself and found an impish boy. “Now who on God’s Green Earth would bark, yell, or criticize you Miss Burke?” After the words escaped his lips he actually felt like a little boy once more. It felt wonderful.
“An American General for one,” Kiley blurted out and continued her diatribe in the humor at the moment. “My mother, father, brother, aunts, uncles, teachers,…”
“Thank you for putting the general is such good company,” Mark laughed.
Randall stared at his superior officer and friend. He never remembered Mark ever laughing and he had known him for over ten years.
“I really do have plans for this evening with a friend,” Kiley reminded the general. “I must inform him of the change of plans.”
“Him?” Mark asked not understanding why that upset him.
“Major Deacon asked me out to dinner this evening,” Kiley replied nonchalantly. She bit her lip when she remembered the no fraternization rule General Hauser had just imposed.
“I’ll have Sergeant Ryan send word to the Major for you,” Mark replied coldly. He would also see to it that the major understood the no fraternization rule. His offer of dinner was different. Kiley was his staff and he often shared dinners with his staff.
Payton Lee ?????????? 33
Chapter 5
“You may drop me off at the Connemara and take the car to your flat. Perhaps you might want to change for dinner,” Mark said to Kiley’s back while she was driving. “I know I would like to change.”
Kiley was surprised to say the least. This gruff general was actually almost human at the moment. He was actually understanding of the fact it had been a long dusty day. Kiley’s uniform was wilted and she felt grimy. It was Susan’s night for a bath, but a cloth wash would feel wonderful. “Yes General, I would like that very much. Where and at what time should I meet you?”
“We’ll grab a ride to the restaurant with someone else and you can meet us at the Red Hunter about 8:00. Would that be acceptable?”
“Wonderful! It would be wonderful!” Kiley replied enthusiastically.
The long drive back to London seemed shorter and Kiley let the generals off at the Connemara. She hurried back to her flat.
As soon as Kiley entered the flat she removed her boots, socks, undid her tie, shirt, and started removing her slacks. Quickly she ran to the bathroom and dipped a cloth into the hot sudsy water Susan was enjoying. “Thanks love. I need to freshen up a bit.”
Kiley washed her self and started applying fresh makeup. She brushed her teeth, redid her hair, applied rouge and lipstick, and then darted to her room for fresh clothing.
Cindy watched the whirlwind and followed Kiley into her room. “What the devil is going on with you? Don’t tell me it is a hot date with your major? Dan tells me he’s wild over you.”
34 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Rummaging through her closet Kiley selected a green silk evening dress and pulled out a pair of matching shoes. “Actually I did have a dinner date with Bob, but General Hauser is treating his staff to dinner tonight and I’m ordered to attend. He suggested I change for dinner. I took that as an order as well.”
“General Hauser?” Cindy gasped. “What did you say? Taking his staff to dinner and you’re part of the staff?”
“I was transferred to the General’s staff this morning,” Kiley responded while dressing. “It was a genuine surprise for me. I wasn’t given any warning. Apparently he returned the day I left for my holiday with Mum and Dad.”
“Doesn’t he despise you?” Cindy asked remembering their conversations of only a few weeks ago. “As I recall you could barely tolerate him.” She shadowed her friend and help Kiley zip up the back of her dress. “That Hauser won’t recognize you dressed up like this. I barely know who you are.” Cindy twirled her around. “You look smashing. This should melt a bit of that General Hauser’s brass.”
“Oh Cindy, I’m not out to melt any brass,” Kiley countered. “I just like feeling a bit feminine every now and then.”
“Well, it doesn’t hurt to make the men look a bit though, does it?”
“You keep thinking that way Cindy,” Kiley laughed. “I’m going to have a smashing dinner and someone else will pay for it. Got to run.”
Kiley drove to the Hunter’s Red. Entering the restaurant she looked about and found the General at the bar. He was a man who stood out in a crowd even without his general’s uniform. Mark Hauser was a tall man. He had to be over six foot, Kiley estimated. He had a roman profile with a strong square jaw. He had thick curly dark brown hair and the most vivid blue eyes.
Mark was enjoying a discussion on football with his friend and adjutant Randall Jones. In his hand was a scotch and soda.
“General,” Kiley stated coming from behind him.
Mark turned around acknowledging her presence. “Burke.” When he turned to see her he couldn’t believe his eyes. She was beautiful. That plain bookish spinster spectacled face had been transformed into a painting of treasure. Her hair was down her back held with a green ribbon. Her eyes sparkled blue with an
Payton Lee ?????????? 35
unexpected beauty. Her lips, oh those lips, were the most luscious kissable lips he had ever seen. They parted slightly in a most sensuous manner. What on earth was he thinking! “Would you care for a drink, Burke?”
“Why thank you General, I would love one.”
“Port? Claret? Gin?”
“Heavens no General. I prefer Scotch on rocks.”
“General Hauser, you table is prepared,” the maitre de informed. “Right this way.”
When the group was seated General Hauser ordered the waiter to bring a Scotch on the rocks for Kiley. He turned to look at Kiley. “Rather unusual drink for a lady.”
“I’ve never claimed to be a lady, General Hauser,” Kiley chuckled. “I perhaps have aspired to be one, but never attained it.”
This optimistic pragmatic young woman puzzled him. Kiley reminded him of his daughter. Perhaps this would explain the interest he had developed in her. Perhaps his sudden feelings for her were paternal. She was just a few years older than his daughter. He suddenly felt very old.
Kiley had been seated inside next to the general. The seat gave her a clear view to the entrance of the restaurant. She glanced up after taking a sip of Scotch and saw Major Bob Deacon enter. “Excuse me,” Kiley remarked rising from her seat and walking briskly toward Bob.
Hauser watched her leave and noticed the object of her pursuit. His mood suddenly went sour. Were those the protective paternal instincts once more?
“Bob!” Kiley called to gain his attention.
“Kiley? The general’s aide told me our dinner engagement was cancelled, but didn’t tell me why. Are you having dinner here tonight?” Bob queried a bit confused. Jealousy or suspicion was never a part of Bob’s character. He was simply happy to see her and possibly have dinner with her.
“The general’s aide didn’t tell you his staff was ordered to have dinner with him?” Kiley asked somewhat surprised herself at the lack of information given to Bob. It was true that she only liked the man, but such treatment was boorish. Her temper was fired up.
36 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“No, but that doesn’t matter. I’m happy to see you and we can have dinner another time,” Bob excused gallantly.
“I will hear of no such thing. You will join us for dinner,” Kiley replied firmly.
“Ah Kiley, a major simply does not invite himself to sit down and dine with a commanding general,” Bob stuttered.
Ignoring his plea, Kiley locked her arm in Bob’s and literally pulled him to the table. “General Hauser, look who walked in unexpectedly. We haven’t ordered our dinner and I told Bob you wouldn’t mind one bit if he joined us.” Kiley’s eyes reflected a bit of the imp within her when she sweetly added, “I told Bob you weren’t at all a kind of snobbish general that wouldn’t allow a non staff member to join him. You did know our dinner was cancelled because of your ordered staff dinner.” To make matters worse, Kiley fluttered those long lashes over her green eyes innocently.
General Randall Jones began shaking with mirth. Linden had told him about Kiley Burke and how she put the general in his place. Linden had told him he felt this female driver was good for Mark. If anyone would be able to shake this general, it would be a personality like Kiley Burke. General Hauser could learn to adjust to the British ally with a taste of humble pie from Kiley Burke. Randall recalled.
Dallas, Harry, and Sean were choking on their drinks. They were waiting for General Hauser to explode and send the two flying across the room with one hot breath of reproof.
General Hauser couldn’t get his mind and mouth to coordinate. On one hand the audacity of this woman was incredible. On the other hand, he truly didn’t worry much about protocol. It seemed to be his underlings and definitely his wife that worried about the proper etiquette. “Of course, do join us. I should have thought of that myself.” The slipping into his real being was short lived. Something clicked back into anger when he watched Bob pull Kiley’s chair and seat her. He pushed that back into his psyche. Anger was something to be controlled. Thanks to his marriage, he had developed an excellent poker face.
Randall stopped laughing. He was in shock.
The other men found the menus quickly and were studying them with scrutiny.
Payton Lee ?????????? 37
“I am surprised to learn of your involvement with Miss Burke,” General Hauser said breaking the silence. A vein appeared on his forehead when he watched Deacon place a hand possessively over Kiley’s hand. “You are aware of the no English fraternization order?”
Kiley’s brows rose with anger. How dare he bring this up now when half the occupying top military brass were already involved heavily with English women. Hah! Now she had him. Before Bob had a chance to respond, Kiley piped up, “Glad to know that excludes me, I’m Irish.”
Bob’s mouth dropped. He was dumbfounded that she would be so impertinent with the commander of American Forces.
Mark Hauser was left speechless as well. No one had ever in his military career given him so much disrespect.
Randall didn’t try to hide his enjoyment of the situation. “Guess you’ll have to include the Irish, Scottish, and every other country our troops will occupy, Mark.”
Mark sipped his drink in silence. Being one up on this hot-tempered red haired woman was now a challenge. He ignored Randall’s question. He turned the conversation toward his expertise and discussed the military maneuvers of history’s great leaders.
Kiley realized she had gone a bit far and didn’t add any of her history knowledge to the military legends.
When dessert was served Mark was feeling more confident again once more and wanted to meet the challenge of the saucy red head. “I take it you are interested in marriage to an American.”
Bob interrupted, “I’m hoping for that General Hauser.” He placed his hand on Kiley’s hand.
Kiley slipped her hand out from under Bob’s. She thought this might be a good opportunity to let Bob truly understand her feelings about his proposal. “Actually I’ve tried marriage once. I found out it didn’t suit me. Since my divorce I’ve discovered a lot about myself. The first reason being I’m not good wife material.”
Mark nearly choked on his torte. The audacity of this woman was incredible. “Not good material?” Mark choked out.
“Why yes, some people should be married. They can devote themselves to the future and career of a spouse. They abandon all their own desires. Worshipping the spouse whether deserving it or not. Sacrificing every hope, dream, and want for
38 ?????????? Five Star Affair
the sake of a mate. No, I am not suited to that lifestyle. I’m far too autonomous, individual, stubborn, …”
“Contrary,” Mark added.
“Converse.”
“Obstinate.”
“Independent.”
“Inflexible.”
“Unmovable.”
“Impertinent.”
“Cheeky.”
“Impudent.”
“Sassy.”
“Insolent.”
“Does any one have a scrabble board?” Randall interceded. “And a dictionary?” Randall couldn’t believe the sparks that flew between the driver and the general. Fraternization would be an issue the general himself would soon be facing if his gut instincts were right.
“What a clever idea,” Kiley responded. “I would simply love to play a good board game. It is so much fun and relaxing.”
Mark found himself feeling wonderful, relaxed, and like a little kid again. “We’ll find one. Get on it Dallas. My rooms at the Connemara have a nice parlor.”
Dallas left in a hurry and returned to the group at the Connemara two hours later with a scrabble board in hand.
General Hauser had a dictionary brought to his room by the concierge. The game and laughing went on until nearly midnight. Since it was very late for Kiley to drive back to the flat, General Hauser made arrangements for her to have a room at the hotel. Major Deacon bid his good nights and returned to his hotel just down the street.
This game had been so relaxing Mark Hauser fell asleep and had the first comfortable and sound sleep he had since the war began and he left for Washington.
Payton Lee ?????????? 39
Chapter 6
“Good Morning General Hauser,” Kiley smiled opening the car door for him.
“Good Morning Burke,” Mark returned. “I see you are back to your alter ego once again.” He allowed his eyes to scan her from top to bottom. Her hair was pulled back tightly and covered with a hat. She wore no make up. Her clothes were a brown uniform shirt, tie, jacket, and slacks. She wore military boots. “Does the insubordinate tongue accompany that disguise?”
“Possibly General Hauser,” Kiley retorted closing the door.
On the drive to Reading Hauser could not squelch his curiosity any more. “Why do you wear that spinster disguise? Last night you were incredibly attractive. I would think a woman as yourself would be most comfortable bringing men to their knees.”
“That’s a thought,” Kiley laughed. “A lovely thought.”
Before he knew it, Mark was laughing with her. “I can see you holding a saber and in your hand the head of the knave that dare ask for your attention.”
“And lopping off the blighter’s head,” Kiley agreed.
Both were laughing so hard they were in tears.
Catching his breath he pursued his question, “So Burke, why do you choose this camouflage?”
“I made a commitment to this war effort when …”
The loud wailing of an air raid siren interrupted Kiley. “Bloody Hell! An air raid!” She exclaimed. “There’s a shelter just around the corner.”
“Ignore it,” Mark ordered. “Just continue driving.”
“Are you mad? Or are you just really stupid and ignorant?” Kiley growled turning the car violently at corner and slamming the
40 ?????????? Five Star Affair
brakes on the car. “Don’t bloody expect me to hold the door for you. During an air raid it’s every man for himself.” With those words of warning Kiley ran from the car leaving the door open. She ran into the shelter and once inside its secure walls she looked behind her. The general wasn’t there. Pushing her way back through the people who were coming into the shelter, she found the general calmly closing the car doors and looking up into the sky. “You bloody lunatic!” Kiley snarled. She grabbed the general’s hand and pulled him into the shelter just as the first bomb hit the streets. It hit very close to the shelter. Dust flew into the unsecured opening of the shelter. Children cried, babies wailed, and women screamed. The bombs continued to fall. The dust filling the shelter, human sweat mingled with the scent of fear.
“I’ve never been in an air raid,” Mark said softly.
“Quite obvious,” Kiley agreed angrily. “You could have bloody well been killed out there. How are we going to win a war when our ally generals haven’t even lived the hell of it all? And worst of all, the ally generals don’t have enough sense to come in out of the inferno?”
“Burke,” Mark whispered. She was so right it hurt. He was put in charge of thousands of lives and he never experienced a battlefront.
“You are a Bloody Fool!” Kiley reprimanded.
“You’re right Burke,” Mark agreed. “It is my responsibility to set example and I’ve just set a lousy one.”
“You’ve never really experienced any of this horror, have you?” Kiley asked sympathetically.
“No Burke, this is the very first air raid and shelter I’ve been in. I’m a military strategist. I use historical reference, personality study, and maps.”
“Then look around you general. You need to see what this war really looks like. Its crumbled buildings throwing dry dust into you mouth until your teeth feel like the only thing it eats is sand. It is dead bodies of men, women, children, and babies. Those bodies are all burned and most charred beyond recognition. Dogs, cats, birds, and small mammals are not sparred this horrible death either. The only things that seem unmoved are fleas, cockroaches, and lice. The smell of human waste and death intermingle. The wounded walk wrapping any cloth they find for binding those wounds. The smell and sight of blood surround you.
Payton Lee ?????????? 41
This is what your soldiers see. They look at the dead staring bodies of their friends and they kill young men and boys so much like themselves. Look at this horror General Hauser. Look and never forget it. Because people like you are here to end it! Until you understand what this war really is, you will never be able to end it.”
“You have been through all of it,” Mark realized sadly. “You’ve been through this hell and back.”
“That I have General Hauser,” Kiley acknowledged. “It’s made me hate war. It’s why I made a commitment to devote myself in every way fighting the Nazis. I will fight them in any opportunity I am given. Being a flighty pretty girl pushes me into a corner of protectiveness by the male gender. I don’t want to be a fluff. I want to use my intelligence and capability in this fight. Be certain of my words. I will fight!”
“The Nazis don’t have a chance,” Mark said firmly. “Not a damn chance in hell with an enemy like you.”
“Why thank you,” Kiley replied cheekily.
“I’m glad you’re on our side,” Mark teased. “And on my staff. I promise you that I will give you the opportunity to give your all to fight the Nazis. I need people like you.”
“You do?” Kiley asked. She couldn’t believe this was the same man she met and disliked completely. Suddenly he was no longer an arrogant self-fulfilled American jerk. She looked into his eyes and saw a bit of fear, a bit of awe, and a bit of humility.
“I do,” Mark answered. “I’m new at this and I know have a lot to learn. I’m about to get black and blue with errors, but by God I believe in this war. Everything I’ve got will go into ending this horror. I’ve been put in charge of thousands of young men’s lives. It’s a gigantic burden, but like you, I will give my all. I take this responsibility seriously. I ask you for your help.”
“You’ve just earned it General,” Kiley smiled.
Mark put his arm around her for no recognized reason. It just felt right at that moment. “We’ll do it together Burke.”
The moment was emotional. Both of them felt it. At that moment they had made a commitment to each other. They thought it was for a common goal. They didn’t realize they had touched each other’s heart in that shelter.
For the first time in a long time, Kiley allowed herself to feel comfort and security in someone’s arms. As she leaned into
42 ?????????? Five Star Affair
his body she felt the rock hardness of his muscles. Lord she felt like she belonged there. She felt so safe. Of course it was just the moment.
“You really are a beautiful woman, Burke,” Mark praised.
“With or without my lipstick?” Burke laughed.
Contrary to her flippant remark, Mark remained quite serious. “Your beauty transcends even your physical attractiveness. You are a beautiful person with your deep sensitivity.”
Burke couldn’t believe her ears. She leaned back in his arm and looked up into his eyes. She could tell he was quite serious and telling the truth. All she could think of saying was, “Thank you.”
“I may need you to listen to me once and awhile. I won’t expect you to say anything, just listen. I’m surrounded by people who won’t voice their opinions or try to inflict their opinions to reach a self need of glory,” Mark shared. “I know you don’t like me very much, but I need someone to listen to me when I’m feeling lost or weak. I can’t show this side of me to anyone else. I need someone to trust.”
“I don’t like you when you are a pompous arrogant ass,” Kiley chuckled. “Which is most of the time, but I do like you when you are a genuine and real person. Just like you are now. You understand my disguise and I’ll understand yours.”
Mark smiled with warmth he hadn’t felt in a long time. A thought to kiss this woman was currently on his mind when the all-clear siren sounded. It was time to put on the war and forget the person once more.
“I hope the car is in one piece. It’s a long walk back to Governor’s Square,” Kiley remarked reluctantly leaving that secure shelter of his arms. Still she broke from the security and trudged ahead of the General to open the car door. “Sorry, this time you will be a little late for the meeting at Reading.”
“An air raid is a plausible excuse,” Mark replied entering the car. “Just see that it doesn’t happen again.”
“Of course General, next time I’ll jump in this car and aim its artillery fire at the bloody Nazi plane. You have my word!” Kiley bit out. This general was a real trial.
When Kiley had seated herself behind the steering wheel Mark answered, “I knew I could count on you.”
Payton Lee ?????????? 43
She looked into the rear view mirror and saw the mischievous smile on his face.
“I’ve been invited to Lord Mountbattan’s country home this weekend,” Mark casually said during the drive to Reading.
“Broadlands?” Kiley asked in surprise. She wondered if she would drive him there.
“The very same. Do you know where it is?”
“I could drive to it blindfolded. It’s heavenly. How lucky you are to receive such and invitation.”
“I’ll see to it that provisions will be made for you to drive me there.”
Kiley couldn’t believe it. Fate had taken her into the service of a major player in this war and would be near by, as history would be made. She actually felt a little humbled.
Upon their arrival at Reading, officers of the camp surrounded General Hauser. He greeted each officer cordially and slowly moved his way over to the growing group of soldiers that were thronging to catch a look at their American commander.
The next day Kiley watched as the press corps had their first conference with the new American commander. Hauser eased press restrictions after listening to all their complaints. He was aware he needed the press corps to be friendly if he were ever to need them. Hauser was also aware the press would stop at nothing to gain confidential information if he were the enemy and not a friend. She admired him for that.
The next day with her luggage packed, Kiley drove the general and his staff to Broadlands. Lord Mountbattan greeted them on the steps. Kiley remained by the car and house staff removed the general’s luggage giving her instructions for her housing. A lady’s maid was sent to take her to her rooms near the servant quarters.
Kiley gasped when she saw her accommodations. She had expected a simple billet type room near the servants quarters. Instead she was surprised to find a sunny room with yellow chintz curtains and matching bedspread under a canopied bed. Adjacent to her room was a small but more than adequate toilette room with a porcelain bathtub. “I must have died and gone to heaven.” Kiley stripped her clothes off and nearly leaped into the hot tub the maid
44 ?????????? Five Star Affair
had drawn for her. The maid had even added bath salts. Kiley soaked in that tub until her skin wrinkled and the water turned cold. The best part of the visit was that she had three days of this luxury without being on call.
Mark Hauser was kept occupied by Lord Mountbattan. They spent hours in discussion about the war and Britain. They played cards, rode horses, and played golf on the lawns. There were also social luncheons and working dinners. He found he missed Kiley’s irritating but enjoyable challenging barbs. The last day they would spend at Broadlands he sought her out. He found her where he was told she had spent a lot of time. Kiley was in the garden reading a book.
Mark took the book from her hand. “Attila the Hun?”
“I’m seeking first hand knowledge of dealing with generals and leaders.”
“Glad to see this country living hasn’t sweetened your caustic personality,” Mark chuckled.
“I’ve a reputation to keep,” Kiley returned in good humor.
“This is a lovely garden,” Mark noted. “Care to take a walk?”
“Won’t you be missed? I’m sure you’re needed somewhere,” Kiley answered sincerely. She knew she was relatively unimportant in the greater scheme of things.
“I’ve been reprieved for an hour,” Mark laughed. “I’d like to take a walk before the luncheon. Come with me.” He held out his hand offering to take hers. “Leave the book. I don’t want a sneak attack.” He was relieved to see that this weekend Kiley wasn’t in her spinster disguise.
Kiley’s hair was sparkling in the sun like golden threads lying in the midst of auburn hair. She had not bound it at all, but had let her hair fall down her back. She was wearing a light green satin blouse with a waisted black satin skirt. She was wearing black flats and no hosiery.
Mark Hauser couldn’t help but admire her beauty and femininity. When he had bent down to take her hand he smelled lilacs.
Kiley took his offered hand and allowed him to help her to her feet. She felt the strength of his body as he lifted her with little strain. He looked so handsome in his knit sweater, white shirt, and
Payton Lee ?????????? 45
crisply pressed woolen slacks. In a uniform or civilian, he was a handsome man.
“Are you enjoying your weekend?” Mark asked releasing her hand and walking down the path between the flowers.
“It is smashing! I’ve forgotten there is still peace and beauty in this world of war and horror. Thank you so much for allowing me to stay here,” Kiley replied gratefully.
“I’m glad you’re able to enjoy it,” Mark said wistfully.
“Of course you can’t take this as a holiday can you?” Kiley asked. She knew the general’s time was completely utilized even here at Broadlands.
“No, I can’t. I’m responsible for planning battles and defeating a major axis power. The worst battles I’ve had so far are the battles of politics with our own allies.”
Kiley knew immediately he had taken her to listen to his weaker side. If he released his worries and frustrations, he could be strong for the politicians and public.
“I’m a soldier. I’m not a politician. I hate politics!”
“But you will learn politics because you have too!” Kiley added.
“Yes, I will.”
“And you’ll be bloody good at them,” Kiley praised. “Lord knows you’ve got me convinced you are a rock hard bloody cold hearted general when you wear that uniform.”
“I’m that convincing?” Mark chuckled.
“Absolutely!” Kiley smiled.
The smile the general returned warmed Kiley’s heart.
Mark took her hand once again and put it in the crook of his arm. “Look! Isn’t that a falcon?”
“Wouldn’t it be wonderful to soar freely like a falcon?” Kiley asked. “Oohhh, so free and without a care except your next meal.”
“Wouldn’t that be lovely,” Mark agreed.
They continued the walk in silence, but it was a comfortable silence. Retracing their steps they were met by Harry Durham. It was time for the man to become a general once more. Without a word he removed her hand from his arm and followed Durham into the main house.
46 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“You really are a strange duck General Hauser,” Kiley said to herself and picked up her book. She would enjoy this small place of heaven for every bloody moment she could.
Kiley woke early the next morning and put on her uniform and her disguise as ugly spinster. Securing the tight topknot on her head Kiley chuckled, “You and that general have a lot in common, Kiley Burke. You both put on one visage for the public, and another secret self you keep hidden revealing it to only a few people. So Kiley Burke, why do you trust this general? Because he hides like you do.” She straightened her tie, pulled down her jacket, and left to wait at the car for the generals.
Payton Lee ?????????? 47
Chapter 7
The next few weeks were frustrating. Every day there were meetings with top brass. The General received no less than ten invitations a day for teas, luncheons, even bar mitzvahs. It seemed every one in London was vying to grab General Hauser’s attentions and good graces.
Kiley whacked a photographer and journalist with her large leather purse just yesterday. She simply lost her temper when they continued to harass her regarding information on the General and what it was like to drive for the American General.
When General Hauser was told about the incident he quipped that perhaps Miss Burke should receive a medal for bravery under fire. Fortunately this was kept within his inner circle and not for the press.
Kiley appreciated General Hauser’s praise and his support of her action. There was a limit to everything and those reporters and photographers had pushed her beyond her limits.
This weekend the General was to spend at Winston Churchill’s Chequers. It was going to be a very important meeting and Kiley was once again given accommodations for the weekend.
“All I have to do is go to the gardens and I’m certain to find you there reading a book,” Mark told Kiley finding her in Chequers gardens.
“I’m just a creature of habit,” Kiley smiled. She looked at the General and saw frown lines deepening on his mouth. “Something is not quite right.”
“Perceptive,” Mark agreed. “Come walk with me.”
Kiley rose and took his offered arm. She knew this was the time he needed to vent his frustrations in private. It was her time
48 ?????????? Five Star Affair
to listen. If this would be her role in winning this war against the Nazis, she was happy to do it.
“I’ve been blockaded,” Mark spit out. “They call my plan foolhardy. Without allied support it is, but we can’t let the Russian front fall. If we do, we can all practice the goose step. Goddammit!”
“What will happen now that they have rejected your plan?”
“I believe in it and I’m going to fight for it. This is a damn political move by Churchill.”
Kiley walked for several minutes with General Hauser. He vented his anger and frustration. When they turned and retraced their steps he took her back to the bench where he found her. “What book are you reading today?”
“This time I’m reading 20,000 leagues under the sea.”
“Great book. I prefer these.” He pulled out a small book. It was a western pulp novel.
Kiley examined it. “Lovely history, your Wild West.” She returned it to him. “Reading takes you away to a place in your mind. It is a place that you control. I’m happy in that make believe place.”
“So am I,” Mark agreed. They sat together on the stone bench. They both opened their books and were lost for several hours until Dallas came to retrieve the General.
As he rose from the bench he whispered, “Again I thank you.”
“At your service general,” Kiley smiled warmly.
After their return to London, Bob continued his pursuit of Kiley. Although she told him she liked him, this was simply not the time for her to even consider marriage.
“I vow to change your mind,” Bob promised and showed up at her flat to take her out to dinner whenever he could.
Two weeks later Kiley was instructed to drive General Hauser and his staff to the airport. A military transport taxied down the runway and Kiley got her first taste of General Oscar Newhall, FDR’s Chief of Staff and Mark’s boss. There was also a Navy Admiral on the plane. He was a quiet man. Kiley wondered about him. Sometimes still waters ran deep.
“I’ve a letter from Martie for you,” Oscar announced once entering Mark’s car. “She’s told me that you haven’t been writing
Payton Lee ?????????? 49
to her, but you’ve been sending letters to Debbie. You must understand how important your image is as a husband and father are. How can you possibly lead your men if you give an example of failure in your private life?”
Mark remained silent. He feared if he uttered one word it would be suicidal. Newhall always had liked Martie for some strange reason.
“We’re deadlocked about Sledgehammer,” Mark offered as topic and hoped that would change the direction of the conversation. It worked.
“I’ll do my best, but in reality we have to deal with policy here, and the President needs an solid agreement. Our policy with our English Ally will be solid,” Newhall answered. “Have you set up the meeting?”
“Tomorrow morning,” Mark answered. “I would also like to talk to you about James Hayes. He needs to be called back to the States.”
“Why is that?”
“He follows the British Army, not ours.”
“What the Hell are you talking about?”
“He starts work late, eats a leisurely lunch, and stays up until midnight. He never works on Sunday,” Mark Complained. “He’s a great brigadier, but too British for the theatre and our invasion.”
“Our invasion when it occurs,” Newhall reminded. “We face major policy issues here, Mark.”
“Goddammit, Churchill promised Roosevelt and Stalin we’d invade to give Hitler hell on two fronts. We need to squeeze him.”
“Policy first Mark,” Newhall reprimanded.
“Policy at the risk of lives of innocents?” Mark queried.
“What the devil are you talking about? Innocents?” Newhall returned.
Kiley wanted to turn around and shout at the imbecilic general. Instead she merely commented. “Perhaps the General is referring to British old men, women, and children that are dying from the bombings. Or perhaps the innocent Jews that we’ve heard stories about mass executions.”
50 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“Does your driver often intrude in private conversations?” Newhall snarled. “You may give more quarter because of her gender, but I suggest you change drivers immediately.”
Kiley’s temper soared once more. The nerve of that man! There was immediate and intense dislike of this American. Mark may have been arrogant, but at least he confronted her directly. Just who did General Newhall think he was? The King? Kiley steamed in silence. How utterly uncaring this general was. He appeared more concerned about policy than human lives. It was obvious this American truly didn’t understand the horrors of war either. She began wishing an air raid would happen right this minute and this general wouldn’t be allowed in the shelter.
Arriving at the Connemara the men left the car and entered the hotel. General Hauser returned to the car and spoke to Kiley. “This war is stressful on all of us. You should also know how tiring a long plane flight could be. We have a small battle tomorrow with our own ally. Thank you for holding back that Irish temper of yours.”
Kiley let her temper out on the general. “Politics! Bah! Bloody Generals, Bloody Egos, and Bloody War. Just give me a gun and I’ll go over to Germany and shoot Hitler myself.”
“Depending upon this meeting I may hop a flight and go over there with you,” Mark snorted.
Kiley returned the general’s laugh with a smile. “Trust me to keep my mouth shut. I wouldn’t want to be responsible for mucking up Allied policy.”
“Good!” Mark exclaimed. “Tomorrow we go to Downing. I suggest you be here at 6:00. You’re dismissed for the rest of the day.”
“Thank you general.” Kiley parked the car and walked to her flat. It was good to be home. Bob was waiting and took her out for dinner and drinks. She drank a little too much, but she felt a wonderful numb. Bob was a wonderful friend. He never asked any questions. They enjoyed evenings discussing history. She learned a great deal of history of the United States.
Crisp and clipped were the words for Kiley while she drove the men to their meeting at Downing Street. Before they arrived Kiley found herself wishing she could stop the car and slam that damned General Newhall with her handbag.
Payton Lee ?????????? 51
“Glad to see you have your girl under control,” Newhall said referring to Kiley. “We can be guaranteed our intelligent conversations won’t be interrupted by a feather headed female.”
After those words they arrived at their destination and Kiley slammed on her brakes giving everyone a solid jolt. She hoped General Newhall would crack his head.
“The policies are weak. The British were slapped in face when the Nazis took Tobruk,” Hauser complained as he departed from the car. “This is a war, not a game of king of the mountain.”
“That is what war is, Mark,” Newhall replied gruffly following Hauser into 10 Downing. “Everything is about being king of the mountain.”
If ever Kiley wanted to practice gunnery, it was today. She believed that if she put Newhall’s picture a thousand yards away, she would still hit the target right between his eyes. He would be the icon for callousness. Oh yes, she was quite certain this man had never commanded young men to watch them die or live under fire. He never would.
The naval admiral Tom Prince leaned down to whisper in her ear, “General Newhall would be a dead man by now if your looks could kill.”
“Sorry sir,” Kiley quickly apologized. “I didn’t mean to be impudent.”
“Don’t be sorry. I couldn’t agree with you more. That man has more arrogant pompousness than Carter has liver pills,” Prince whispered again. “I dare say the man has never lived under fire.”
“You have,” Kiley replied as a statement.
“Indeed I have. I’ve seen my friends and my men blown to pieces,” Prince stated. “War is hell, not a game.”
“Thank you sir,” Kiley smiled. A small tear ran unheeded down her cheek.
“You have,” Prince repeated knowingly. He rubbed his palm up and down her uniformed sleeve. “You have.” He disappeared into the house.
Kiley pulled out her book and sat down in the car to read. It was hours before the men emerged. Newhall ordered her to return them to the Connemara. She drove them back to Downing after they changed into their dinner clothes. Fortunately for her, she was dismissed. Limousines were waiting to take the Prime Minister, the British staff, General Newhall and the American staff
52 ?????????? Five Star Affair
to dinner. She was relieved because she often heard Hauser complain these dinners lasted until two in the morning. Kiley noted that Hauser and his staff were looking very tired lately.
These meetings continued for a week. Everyone was showing fatigue and finally a plan was agreed upon. The Americans would invade Algeria. Mark was given an additional star and given supreme command of the invasion Churchill called Torch.
Kiley was thrilled that Newhall had returned to the United States. She thought Mark Hauser wouldn’t look so tired and worried anymore. She was half right. He didn’t look as tired, but he looked more worried.
There were two headquarters now. Hauser had his staff two blocks down at the AFHQ, American Forces Headquarters. He maintained the ETO, European Theatre Operations. Both he and his close staff split time between the two.
Kiley was privy to all private conversations and plans. Nearly half were made and discussed in the back seat of the car. Mark’s decision to keep her as driver served him well because both the American and British never for a moment thought anything would be discussed of importance with a woman driving. “Bloody smart of you General Hauser. They all think that if you discussed anything with a woman driver it would be the next night’s news.”
“It was the British and their censorship and secrecy like Enigma that taught me many things. This includes the sanctity of the privacy of my car. My mother also taught me that the best way to keep a secret would be to keep it in the open,” Mark laughed. It felt good to laugh. “And you Burke are my best kept open secret.”
“It’s good you listened to your wise mother and not hold her female gender against her,” Kiley quipped.
They approached General Hauser’s next best-kept secret. His aide had found him a small cottage to escape. His escape was not needed from the pressure of planning Torch or even the Axis powers. Mark Hauser needed to escape from social and society pressures. Too many people were trying to impose upon his position to gain political and monetary favors. The haven was called Cable Cottage.
“We’re here General,” Kiley announced when she stopped the car to lift the bar crossing the road.
Payton Lee ?????????? 53
“It’s a long way back to London,” General Hauser said when she sat back in the car. “Spend the night at the cottage tonight and I’ll see to it that you be billeted nearby when I’m here.”
“Thank you general,” Kiley appreciated. “That is very considerate. I am exhausted when I drive back to London and get up early to be here.”
“Then its settled,” Mark said authoritatively.
“One small problem General Hauser. Although I maintain minimal toiletries in my handbag, I’m afraid I didn’t bring any nightwear as I usually do when we spend evenings at Broadlands or Chequers.”
“I’m sure I have extra pairs of pajamas. You’ll wear a set of mine,” Mark offered.
“People might talk.”
“What people?” Mark laughed. “My staff?”
Kiley laughed at the absurdity of it herself. The general had been a perfect gentleman since their last run in. The more she learned about him and understood him, the more she liked and admired him.
Later that evening and after a game of bridge, Dallas handed a pair of silk pajamas to Kiley. She was walking upstairs to her room when she heard General Hauser swearing. She stopped to listen.
“Goddammit Dallas, what the hell are you doing?” Mark roared. “The last thing I need is to let Martie think she was getting her way. I need this divorce to go through and my lawyers certainly do not want her lawyers to get hold of this.”
“But sir, General Marshall ordered you to send letters. I felt that I needed to protect you,” Dallas stuttered fearly.
“How many of these goddamn letters have you sent to her?”
“About a dozen or so.”
“Goddammit. I’ll have to let my lawyers know just where these letters have been coming from,” Mark stormed. He went into the small study of the cottage. If things weren’t pressurized enough, he had to tell his attorneys just what his orderly had been doing and what to face. He put the letter Dallas had written in the envelope.
54 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Dallas was unrepentant. “General sir, you cannot act in an insubordinate manner against the Chief of Staff. You are so important in this war theatre you must be concerned for your image. What type of man are you projecting to the thousands of men that will go to war for you?”
“Are you saying my divorce would affect these boys?” Mark snarled. “Half of these boys are dating English women and their women are dating men other than their husbands. What they need is a leader to depend on to make decisions and win this war.”
“Your image…” Dallas started to comment.
“Damn my image,” Mark shouted. “You will cease writing these letters.” Those words left no quarter.
It was the first Kiley had really heard about the general’s private marital problems. She had been through a bad marriage herself. A sense of camaraderie filled her. She walked into the tiny room and changed into the pajamas. They were voluminous so she decided to wear only the top. As comfortable as she was, she couldn’t seem to sleep. Kiley stood by the window and stared at the quiet countryside. It was lovely and soothing to touch a bit of beauty in the ugliness of the war. The doorknob rattling startled her.
General Hauser stood silhouetted against the light of the hallway.
He saw Kiley bathed in bright moonlight. His eyes roamed from the top of her moonlight kissed hair down her throat to the perfectly formed breasts underneath his pajama tops. He couldn’t help as his eyes went downward to the thighs that were exposed. Her legs were shapely and her ankles small and feminine. His body began to betray him. It had been so long since he had a woman beneath him. His mouth dry and his body hot Mark found himself saying, “I wanted to make sure you were comfortable.”
“Yes General Hauser, I’m quite comfortable,” Kiley replied nervously. She felt his eyes scrutinizing her as a lion scrutinizes its next meal.
“You can’t sleep?” Mark asked with concern. He knew he shouldn’t be there. He shouldn’t be talking to her. His body was firing up like a rocket. He was starved for female companionship.
“No,” Kiley answered. “I don’t even know why.”
Mark wanted to throw her on the bed and make her so tired she would sigh and fall asleep in his arms. The thought reminded
Payton Lee ?????????? 55
him of his vulnerability and how Martie had snared him in the first place. “Well do try to sleep. We will be up early tomorrow. I’m sending Randy to Gibraltar tomorrow.”
56 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Chapter 8
Major Bob Deacon was waiting for Kiley when she returned from the weekend at Cable Cottage.
“Bob, how long have you been waiting here?” Kiley asked when she walked up the steps to her flat.
I have been here every evening since Friday night,” Bob replied.
“Do you want to go out to eat?” Kiley asked stopping in front of her door.
“Can we have dinner in? I’ve only got two hours.”
“Two hours?” Kiley questioned inserting her key in the door lock. “Two hours and then what?”
“I have to go to the depot and catch my train to Scotland.”
“Scotland?” Kiley nearly shouted. “Oh dear God, not Scotland.”
“What do you know Kiley?” Bob pressed.
“I know everything. I work in the bloody headquarters of this war, remember?” Kiley grated. “Why did you volunteer for active duty? You are so unsuited for battle. You are kind, soft spoken, intelligent, gentle, and definitely not aggressive.”
“Thank you, I think,” Bob teased kissing her nose. “I haven’t pressed you for an answer to my marriage proposal.”
“This isn’t the right time to ask either. Not as you are about to go off and get yourself blown into pieces somewhere.”
“You’re always right Kiley, but consider this. Where ever I go I will have our picture and I will tell everyone I’m going to marry this beautiful wonderful woman.”
“Bob…”
“Not another word. I love you Kiley and I will wait for you as long as I live.”
“Try to live a long time,” Kiley whispered.
“For you my love, anything.” Bob kissed Kiley with a passion. “Remember that one.” He started to walk away.
Payton Lee ?????????? 57
“Wait, I have the general’s car this evening. I’ll drive you to the depot,” Kiley volunteered. “That will give us some more time together and talk about things, like we always have.”
The last two hours before the train pulled away became a special time for Kiley and Bob. They liked each other. They were friends even though Bob had hoped to be lovers. They shared love for learning. That is what they shared together for the last hours they had together before his shipped off.
Kiley watched the train filled with British and American soldiers disappearing into the night. “Live Bob. For God’s sake live.”
The meeting in Gibraltar did not go well. Hauser was furious that he could not get the French cooperation he so desperately needed for operation Torch. Weeks later after several dozen meetings Mark Hauser decided to go to Gibraltar himself.
Kiley was summoned up to his office in the middle of the day.
“Go home and pack a bag, Burke. We’re going to Gibraltar,” Mark ordered stuffing papers in a briefcase.
“Am I to drive there?” Kiley asked in surprise. She had never been asked to go with him on his flights to other parts of the realm. She was only asked to drive around England and Wales.”
“You’re my secret weapon. Remember?” Mark chuckled. “I’m going to be meeting with Girard and I need you to tell me if his translator is completely honest. I want nothing said that I wouldn’t know what it is. Now hurry. We’ll be leaving shortly.”
Three hours later they were on the military transport plane flying to Gibraltar.
“It’s incredibly beautiful,” Kiley remarked before they entered the waiting car.
“To think we are only a few rolls of barbed wire away from the Axis powers,” Mark added shrugging his shoulders.
The staff was taken to the temporary AFHQ headquarters deep beneath the Rock of Gibraltar’s surface.
After settling in her quarters, Kiley was ordered to remain close to Mark Hauser’s side. Only his executive staff knew of Kiley’s multi lingual talents and nothing had ever been said about it to anyone outside of their group.
58 ?????????? Five Star Affair
There was French, British, Canadian, and American military brass everywhere. The Army, RAF, and Navy were also present. Even before Hauser had left London, Operation Torch had been set in motion. Hauser’s purpose for setting temporary operations in Gibraltar had been for the explicit purpose of coming to agreement with General Giraud. He also needed Admiral Darlan of the Vichy French to order his navy not to fire upon British, American, and Canadian ships in the Mediterranean.
General Giraud finally arrived late in the evening. It was only hours away from the entry of the task force into the Mediterranean.
“Now there is haughtiness walking,” Kiley whispered to Mark as the general walked into the room.
“He looks like a bad cartoon character,” Mark chortled in reply. Keeping his poker face, Mark offered his hand to the general.
“I understand the allied forces are going to attack my country men in Oran and Algiers,” Giraud said directly. “And you wish me to speak to my country men. You wish me to tell them to lay down their arms.”
“And how was your trip?” Mark asked. “We were happy to bring you safely from Vichy France. We were pleased to know that you had escaped from the Nazi prison.”
“Mon General, let us discuss the present situation at hand,” Giraud chided.
Beneath his calm exterior, Mark wanted to slam his fist into the supercilious general.
Kiley took in every word of translation from the French interpreter. She understood every word. She understood even more the egotistical bearing and body language of General Giraud. Kiley was ever grateful she didn’t have to negotiate with this Frenchman. She had always been aware of the quirks of the brass surrounding Mark Hauser, but this one was an absolute prize of irritation.
“The situation at hand is the deaths of American and French boys in a field of battle. Deaths that can be avoided by your speaking to your country men,” Mark in a restrained growl.
“Who is the commander of this invasion?” Giraud demanded to know in question.
“I am,” Mark answered honestly.
Payton Lee ?????????? 59
“If I am to speak to my country men, It is I who must lead this invasion,” Giraud stated crossing his arms over his chest. “I am France. I will subject myself to no one.”
Mark knew that as a three star general he was considered a junior officer to General Giraud. The general would be considered a five star general in France.
Kiley was furious. How many deaths would be the direct result of this general’s refusal to address his country? Damn it, unnecessary deaths on both sides.
The discussion continued on getting louder and turned into a shouting match. After several hours Kiley knew that this was only a ply on Giraud’s part. She left the room and came back with a folded paper in her hand.
“A special bulletin from Washington,” Kiley lied to pull him away from the useless argument.
Mark opened the paper and found it was blank. As difficult as it was, he did not laugh. He maintained his straight face. “Excuse me General Giraud. This matter needs my attention.” Mark followed Kiley outside of the room. “What are you up to, Kiley?”
“Nothing more than giving you a breather from that useless conversation,” Kiley quipped. “He has no intention of talking to the French. He’s only biding time.”
“That I figured out,” Mark chuckled. “If our invasion fails he wants to distance himself from it. If it is successful he..”
“Wants to make sure he gets the credit,” Kiley finished.
“Exactly!” Mark emphasized.
“That is why you needed to get away from it,” Kiley explained. “It is a waste of your precious time and energy.”
“There are times I marvel at your understanding and comprehension, Kiley Burke.”
“Thank you, Mon General!” Kiley answered with smiles. “Care for some coffee?”
“I’d prefer a walk and a cigarette,” Hauser suggested pulling a cigarette from his pocket and lighting it. He handed it to Kiley and lit another one for himself. He led the way down a path that led to a rock garden. There they found a stone bench and sat upon it.
“This is incredibly beautiful and peaceful here,” Kiley murmured. “When did you find it?”
60 ?????????? Five Star Affair
“Did I find it or is it the company I keep that makes it,” Mark said profoundly. He put his arm around Kiley and before he allowed another thought, his lips were upon hers.
The kiss sent an electric shock through the two of them. The jolt of electricity jolted them apart.
“I’m sorry,” Mark apologized. “I shouldn’t have done that.”
Kiley licked her lips. That kiss was something she had never experienced before. “Why?” she squeaked wondering why he had kissed her.
Mark misunderstood her question. “I had no right. My God, I’m old enough to be your father.”
Kiley’s eyes rounded in surprise. She opened her mouth to contradict him, but he spoke once more.
“Forgive me, you are engaged.”
“What?” Kiley shouted. “I am not! Who told you otherwise?”
“Harry. He told me that before Bob left he stated he intended to marry you when this war was over,” Mark answered quickly. He was completely surprised by Kiley’s response.
“Bob told me the same thing when he left,” Kiley sighed. “I should have told him, no. I couldn’t bring myself to tell him. God, I should have. I like him. I really do. It’s just..”
“Just?”
“My first marriage soured me completely. I don’t know if I could ever love again,” Kiley shared. Her eyes were filling with tears. She couldn’t bear for the general to see her so weak. She was strong. Kiley stood and ran back to the bunker.
Mark stood. For the first time in his life he felt helpless. Worse than helpless, he felt confused. He felt happy. Kiley wasn’t engaged to Bob Deacon. Why did he feel so happy and relieved? Why did he kiss her? Mark went back to the bunker. Arguing with General Giraud was something he did understand.
Early in the morning, long before dawn, Mark found he couldn’t sleep. He walked down the path once more and looked across the sea. On the Atlantic side he watched the ships heading toward the Mediterranean Sea. It was a beautiful sight to behold. The invasion was about to begin. Giraud and Darlan would not participate. An intense sense of pride filled Mark. “We’ll do it
Payton Lee ?????????? 61
ourselves,” he said quietly. It was then he noticed a small figure sitting on the bench. Mark nearly ran to her. He needed to share this with her.
“Kiley,” Mark addressed.
“General,” Kiley answered trying to choke away her sob.
“What is it? What’s wrong? Are you ill?” Mark asked worriedly hearing the sob in her throat. He sat next to her on the bench and placed his arm around her protectively.
Kiley couldn’t stop her tears or sobs. With a quivering voice Kiley answered, “This time forgive me. I’m sorry. I feel so weak and vulnerable right now. There are times I can be strong and brave. Most of the time I can be strong and brave. Right now I feel weak. God, I hate it that you found me like this.”
“I never imagined that such a stubborn willful women like you was capable of being weak,” Mark soothed. “It’s alright to be weak. We all are weak now and then.”
“You never are,” Kiley strangled another sob. “You are always so strong. You are invincible, unmovable, unflappable, stoic, powerful..”
“That’s enough!” Mark laughed. “ Another word and you would declare me a god.”
“Then I would have to add omnipotent,” Kiley chuckled. “That you are not.”
“I wish I were. Of all the above traits, I wish I had that one,” Mark desired. “This war would be a lot easier.” He quickly held up his hand. “Yes I know. If war would easy we would have it too often.”
Kiley’s red swollen tear stained eyes looked into Mark’s soft blue eyes.
“What is hurting you so badly?” Mark asked gently.
“Please don’t ask me,” Kiley begged. How could she explain to the general that his brief kiss stirred something inside of her that scared her to death? It was a wanting something that she had convinced herself she could never have. She wanted to be loved. Her ex husband had cured her of that notion. She couldn’t be loved. She wasn’t worthy of love. Damn that wanting! Those tears were her reminder that she was never worthy of being loved. She was never good enough for anyone. Perhaps she wasn’t worthy of life. Everyone from a child on had told her she was an
62 ?????????? Five Star Affair
awful child. “I couldn’t explain it to you or anyone. Can you just hold me? It feels so good.”
Mark didn’t answer. He pulled her closer into his body with his arms. “Look over there,” Mark said pointing to the small ships making their way through the straits. “I was hoping to share this with you. There go our ships, our equipment, and our men. It has begun.”
Kiley melted into his embrace. She allowed her weakness to take over just this once. His arms were warm and welcoming. For the first time in a long time, Kiley felt safe and secure. Kiley allowed herself to feel she belonged.
The two-silhouetted figures sat in the moonlight watching the ships sail into the Mediterranean. They sat together long after the ships had disappeared. It was dawn when they separated and walked hand in hand to the bunker for breakfast.
Harry Durham met them at the door. “I was just about to search for you. Breakfast is ready.”
“Any news on our friend Giraud? Or Admiral Darlan?” Mark questioned testily.
“Darlan cannot be reached at all. As for Giraud? He is hiding in his room,” Harry answered flippantly. “Come in. I’m hungry. Let’s eat.”
“I’m not hungry,” Mark growled.
“Neither am I,” Kiley agreed.
Both their minds were on the soldiers and sailors heading right into the jaws of the enemy. Who was that enemy? The French? The Nazis? It was both. Without intervention of the Vichy French, the Nazis and French military would fire on the ships killing sailors and soldiers as they landed. Neither could think of food with their stomachs churning in anxiety for future of those men.
Harry ignored them and went straight to the mess for breakfast.
Mark and Kiley went to the war room. There they found Dallas. He was keeping track of all radio calls from the armada.
Dallas looked up and nodded to Mark, “The battle is on.”
Mark sat between Dallas listening to the radio and the Teletype ticker.
Kiley chose to stand by the war table where WACs were moving ships as reports came in.
Payton Lee ?????????? 63
Hours went by. The next days arrived.
“Goddammit,” Mark shouted. His eyes were swollen and red from lack of sleep, too much coffee, and too much nicotine. “The Goddamn Frogs are sinking their own ships.”
“To prevent the Nazis from taking them,” Kiley reminded.
“And to prevent the British and our troops from using them,” Mark roared back. “Goddamn Vichy Frogs.” Anger was his consolation.
The news was good. The troops had taken hold of North African soil. Oran was theirs. With this news, Mark Hauser took food and rest.
The next day General Giraud returned to the war room and offered to speak to the French.
“A little late aren’t you?” Mark snarled.
“Too many lives are lost,” Giraud excused.
Mark bit his tongue.
Kiley whispered quietly to Mark, “and we are winning. We know what side we need to be on.”
That was the first smile anyone had seen on Mark’s face in days. “Indeed,” Mark agreed.
As it turned out, the French paid no attention to Giraud and little attention to Darlan.
The invasion was successful and Mark was left to deal with Darlan. He sent his friend Linden to meet with the French Admiral with instructions to name Darlan governor of North Africa. The decision had been his alone to give him a better chance to obtain the sea ports of Bizerte and Tunis. In those two cities there were airfields only a few hundred miles from Sicily.
64 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Chapter 9
The Darlan agreement infuriated public opinion. It was a choice Hauser felt he had to make regardless of public opinion. He flew to Algiers for a meeting with Darlan to settle the agreement.
Kiley was sent back to London. It was an order Mark quickly regretted. He trusted her perceptions and translations. He wished Algiers had been safe enough for her to be there with him as he made the agreements with Darlan.
In the meantime the American public was incensed at the establishing of a former Nazi as governor of French North Africa. Mark’s brother Vincent was sent to repair public relations. The war department had set up an agency for propaganda and Vincent was one of the highest-ranking officials.
For two weeks, Mark enjoyed his brother’s company as Vincent repaired the backlash from the appointment.
“I’ve seen a lot of Martie at the Capitol,” Vincent shared with his brother one quiet evening.
“Isn’t that I bit far from New York? I thought that’s where she was staying with Durham’s wife.”
“She’s doing her public bit for the war effort,” Vincent offered. “Martie visits veteran hospitals and the war wounded. She is great lending the image of the wife of the Commander of the ETO to war bond sales. Your wife is the epitome of a public relations angel. She says and does all the right things at all the right times.”
“My soon to be ex-wife.”
“I believe you should re think this. Martie is the perfect wife for you. You belong to history and this could lead to a
Payton Lee ?????????? 65
political future for you. You will need a political wife like Martie.”
“Martie is the perfect political wife for a politician. I’m military,” Mark countered.
“Bunk!” Vincent grouched. “The military is more political than politics and you know it.”
“Martie knows it all too well. I was bullied into everything. Martie did everything right all too well. I had to take assignments I didn’t want. When I had assignments I loved, Martie deserted me to stay with her parents. When she stayed with me all we did were those perfect parties with perfect people. I’ve had that up to my neck,” Mark complained. “You should know Vincent I’ve filed for divorce. My lawyers tell me that it will be final in a month or two. This pretense of hers is ludicrous.”
“Are you crazy?” Vincent shouted. “This is not the time for a divorce. You’re apple pie and hot dogs. Is it that woman driver of yours? Is she the reason you’ve decided this? The rumors I’ve heard back home are true?”
“Kiley is engaged to someone. She is a brilliant linguist with a knack of perceptions I count on. She is also one hell of a good driver. There has never been anything like that between us. Hell, she’s almost as old as my daughter.”
“Okay! Okay! I’m convinced,” Vincent replied holding up his hands in defense. “We’ll drop the subject. If you are that unhappily married, you should get a divorce.
“Thank you,” Mark appreciated grumpily. “You have to know the kind of hell my marriage has been to understand why I have to get this divorce. I don’t give a damn what image she projects. I know the hell I live as her husband.”
“Anything else about this you want to share with me?”
“I’m not certain she is all that faithful.”
“Mom always did comment on Martie’s flirtatiousness.”
“Mom could always read through the lines,” Mark agreed. “I should have listened to her before I jumped into marriage.”
Vincent placed his hand on Mark’s shoulder. “I’ll support you in this divorce all the way. I’ll also make certain it is downplayed by the press.”
“I appreciate that Vince. I have to put all my concentration on this war, its battles, its men, and its politics.”
66 ?????????? Five Star Affair
A few days later Mark decided to send for Kiley. In French Africa he wanted her nearby to listen and translate to him in private exactly what was being said. With Darlan as governor, that was even more important now.
“Oscar,” Martie whispered into his ear. “It’s time to wake up. You have to get home before the sun rises.”
A shallow grunt announced that Oscar was waking up. His hand rubbed the silk covered nub of Martie’s breast. “Lord I hate to leave this,” Oscar grumbled. “You are magnificent.”
“We can’t take any chances. Mark is destined to be great and I’ll be right next to him.”
“It could have been me if I hadn’t made the wrong choice,” Oscar complained rising from the bed and reaching for his scattered clothes.
“We both should have met each other before we made our mistakes. Unfortunately we have to live with them,” Martie stated angrily. “I don’t enjoy be married to that country boob. I have to make the best of it. Which reminds me. His lawyers are pushing through the divorce. We have to stop it. Somehow. I think you’d better place some pressure on him.”
“I’ll think of something. Remember I talked FDR into making your husband commander of the ETO. It makes our time together so much easier,” Oscar bragged.
“You also made him a real hero.”
“Isn’t that what you wanted my dear?” Oscar chortled pulling on his pants.
“It is, but I need him to heel and face his responsibility,” Martie snorted.” Especially his responsibility to me.”
Oscar laughed and gave Martie a kiss on her nose.
Kiley found herself on the Dart Moor heading for Hauser’s Algiers headquarters. It was sailing in the Mediterranean. Nazi wolf packs had been sighted and were concentrated in the sea. The captain had been warned. Every night Kiley and the WACs were told to keep alert and a duffle bag packed for such a submarine attack. One night away from port the worst happened. The Dart moor was torpedoed. Kiley and the WACs found themselves adrift in lifeboats. The survivors didn’t know how they would be rescued. The rescuers could be friend or foe.
Payton Lee ?????????? 67
Dallas was the most perceptive of Mark’s staff. He had watched his commander check on the progress of the Dart Moor. Dallas realized several months ago that Kiley had become special to Mark Hauser. Although his commander tried to hide and deny his feelings, Dallas knew Kiley and Mark were destined to be a couple. He just hoped it could be possible for them. When Dallas received news of the Dart Moor sinking, he knew he was the only one to tell Mark. He didn’t trust Harry and it wasn’t because Harry was having one hell of an affair with a WAC he made certain accompanied him everywhere. Sean was a loyal valet and aide, but he was loyal to Martie also. That scenario included Jacob Sterns, Mark’s personal valet.
“Sir,” Dallas cleared his throat.
Mark was studying papers from his frontline generals. “What is it Dallas?”
“I just got word the Dart Moor was torpedoed.”
Mark went pale. His silence and mood were exactly what Dallas had expected.
“Any word on Burke?” Mark choked out. He couldn’t hide his emotions no matter how hard he tried.
“No sir,” Dallas answered. “There has been no word on survivors.”
“Find out for me, Dallas.”
“Yes sir,” Dallas replied. He walked backward out the door and closed it. He realized Mark needed time to get his emotions under control. A commander in his position wasn’t allowed personal emotions.
Kiley and her friends had been picked up by a British ship and taken to Oran. She had heard that Bob Deacon was stationed at Oran. With only her duffle bag of two uniforms and two pair of stockings, she was deposited on the docks. Her first idea was to contact Hauser’s staff and to do that she hoped she could find Bob. During wartime, it would be weeks before a listing of survivors would be made. She was hungry, tired, and stranded. Without proper papers and money she would be lucky to get shelter and food at than a red cross hostile. Those places were already over crowded. Yet, she knew she had to let Hauser’s staff know she had survived. Kiley believed in first things first, even over her
68 ?????????? Five Star Affair
own comfort. She found out where the headquarters in Oran was located. Finding a ride, Kiley was taken there hoping to find Bob. Without thinking, she ran into the headquarters. A military police tried to stop her, but she managed to elude him. Once in the office Kiley announced, “I need to speak to Major Deacon.”
A sergeant laughed at the female spectacle. She was barefoot, wrapped in an oversized naval lieutenant’s coat, and her hair was in a wind blown disarray. “There ain’t no major here by that name.” He looked at her bare feet.
“Look, I’ve just been torpedoed.”
That set the sergeant and the rest of the enlisted men in the headquarters in an uproar of laughter.
Kiley was furious. She was tired, hungry, and now the laughing stock of lecherous undisciplined American soldiers. What was she thinking coming here? “Damn it, find me Major Bob Deacon.”
“There is no Major Deacon here,” the soldier chortled sarcastically. “Will I do? I’d love to torpedo you.”
An officer walked into the area between her and the mocking soldiers. “What’s going on here?” the officer said haughtily.
Kiley was into pure rage at the moment. “Look, I was on the Dart moor. My ship was torpedoed and sunk. I am tired, hungry, and in no mood to deal with the impudent species before me. I am a member of General Mark Hauser’s personal staff. I need to speak to him. You have a radio here, don’t you? Headquarters generally do.”
“Okay lady. I’ll play along. Why don’t we just contact General Hauser?” the officer snickered looking at the radio operator. “Contact Hauser, but ask for one of his aides. I don’t think the general would be to happy to be interrupted for a gal.”
“Yes sir,” the corporal sniggered.
Kiley was exasperated by their attitude, but didn’t let it bother her. They thought she was playing a game. She knew this was one way she could contact the Hauser staff and let them know she survived and was ready to be on the next ship to Algiers. Kiley was becoming more agitated as the soldiers and officers eyed her contemptuously. One more remark about having a man torpedo her and she would blow higher than one of those Nazi bombs.
Payton Lee ?????????? 69
The lieutenant made such an error. “You sure the guy that torpedoed you said his name was Hauser? Some men would have been less creative. Perhaps Napoleon?”
“Listen to me you insolent, ignorant, small minded, little excuse for a soldier. I was on the ship, Dart Moor. If your little mind can handle such news, I shall inform you that press reports are accurate. A Nazi torpedo sank the ship. I was one of the survivors picked up in a lifeboat by HMS Prince of Wales. Because I am a member of General Hauser’s staff I must notify him of my survival and location. I am tired, hungry, and quite irritable. When I do speak to General Hauser’s staff, and I will! You will be responsible for my report. I may just eat one of you for my lunch and throw your bones to some Nazi that are in prison camps.” Kiley crossed her arms in a defiant stance daring anyone to say a word.
The lieutenant was about to brave deadly waters and come back with a retort when their attention was drawn to the corporal on the radiophone.
“Yeah, some ditzy broad here says she was on the Dart Moor and is one of General Hauser’s staff.” The corporal listened to the voice at the other end. “What’s her name? I don’t know. Just a minute.” The corporal looked at Kiley. “What’s your name?”
“Kiley Burke!”
The corporal returned to the radiophone. “She says her name is Kiley Burke.” Again there was silence as he listened. “We’re calling from Oran, sir.”
Dallas was in the general office listening for any reports of survivors from the Dart Moor. When he heard the sergeant talking to some corporal, he quickly picked up on the conversation. He grabbed the radiophone and asked the corporal on the other end what the woman’s name was. He motioned to Sean and holding his hand over the receiver of the radiophone ordered him to get General Hauser immediately.
“Is Burke there with you?” Dallas asked the corporal. “Good! Hold on a moment.” He turned to see General Hauser entering the room led by Sergeant Sean Ryan. Dallas held up his hand and beckoned the general. When Hauser was near he placed
70 ?????????? Five Star Affair
his hand over the receiver once more. “It’s Burke. She’s calling from Oran.”
The look of relief washing over Mark’s face was pictorial. He took the radiophone from Dallas’ hand.
“Hello? Hello, Burke?”
“Who is this?” the corporal in Oran questioned.
“This is General Mark Hauser. Put Kiley Burke on the line immediately.”
The corporal turned ashen white. He swallowed and handed the phone to Kiley. He looked to his lieutenant and whimpered, “It’s General Hauser. He wants to talk to her.”
Kiley couldn’t hold back the look of triumph she felt. These imbeciles had nearly called her a liar. It was wonderful seeing their arrogant faces turn white in humiliation. “Hello General Hauser?” she cooed.
The lieutenant ordered a chair for Kiley and ran to get her a cup of coffee. He offered it to her sheepishly as she continued her conversation with General Hauser.
“I’m fine physically other than being very tired and hungry. Oh, they just offered me some coffee. How sweet!” Kiley smiled at the lieutenant fluttering her eyelashes. What a difference in her treatment now that they knew she was on the General’s staff. Isn’t that always the case? It doesn’t matter who you were, only who you knew. If she had been lying there was a good chance she could have ended up being raped. “I was picked up by the British ship, Prince of Wales. As soon as I arrived here I thought it best to call you. What could I use? A good hot bath and some fresh clothes, but more importantly a hot meal! After all that I would love a soft bed. What? Yes, there is an officer here. Of course,” Kiley ended the conversation. “General Hauser would like to speak to you. Perhaps he wants to explain about the torpedoing of the Dart Moor. Do you think?” She handed the phone to the lieutenant.
The lieutenant swallowed hard and adjusted his collar. If suddenly felt like it was choking him. He stood straight as if in attention when he took the phone.”
“This is General Hauser and these are my orders. Kiley Burke is one of my staff members. I want her treated with the utmost respect. She is to be given quarters, a hot bath, hot food,
Payton Lee ?????????? 71
and a soft bed. I will be sending my private plane to pick her up in the morning.”
“Yes sir!” the lieutenant exclaimed saluting the radiophone.
Kiley thought she might burst out laughing. The lieutenant looked so ridiculous. It was then she heard Bob’s voice.
“Kiley? Kiley that is you! My God I can’t believe it!” He pulled Kiley into his arms. “How on earth did you get here?” He looked down her body and saw the bare feet, naval coat, and knotted hair. “Kiley what happened to you? Or is this a new disguise?”
“Bob, it’s so good to see you,” Kiley sighed. At last she was with a friendly face. “Your last letter said you were in Oran. I’m so glad you’re here.”
“What the devil happened to you? How did you get here?” Bob questioned. He couldn’t believe she was here with him. He thought she was safe in London.
“I was on my way to AFHQ in Algiers on a perfectly lovely boat. The Nazis decided to decorate it with a lovely hole in the bottom. I ended up on a lifeboat with twenty-five others and picked up by a British ship. Completely stranded, hungry, tired, and about at the end of my tether.”
“We’re trying to find a room for her, Colonel Deacon,” the lieutenant interjected.
“I’ll let her use my quarters. I’ll billet with Major Johnson. Come along Kiley. Let’s get you some food. I know how testy you get when you’re hungry.”
“Dressed like this?”
“A lovely choice of ensemble,” Bob teased. “The barefoot look is fabulous. Don’t worry about that nonsense right now. I’ll take you to my quarters and order some food.”
Arriving at the simple flat Bob showed her the bathroom. “Take a hot bath and I’ll get some food for you.”
Kiley took a long hot luxurious bath. It was absolutely heavenly soaking in hot suds. She stayed and soaked long after the hot water had turned tepid.
“Kiley, I’ve got the food,” Bob announced through the doors across the bedroom and bathroom from the living room.
Reluctantly Kiley toweled herself and walked into the bedroom. She found a pair of Bob’s pajamas on the bed. Lying
72 ?????????? Five Star Affair
next to the pajamas was a toothbrush, paste, and hairbrush with pins.
“Oh you sweet thoughtful man,” Kiley grinned. The pajamas were silk and soft against her skin. She brushed her hair thoroughly, but decided not to pin it. She let it hang long and loose. The aroma of hot spicy food permeated through the bedroom door. Kiley’s stomach began to grumble loudly.
Bob looked up as she entered the living room. He had prepared a small area on the top of the coffee table between the sofa and loveseat. “You look absolutely smashing! That is what they say in London isn’t it?”
“Yes,” Kiley replied. She glanced hungrily over the fare Bob had prepared for her. “I am absolutely famished!”
The food may have been normal fare, but to Kiley the food was a feast. She ate with a flourish.
Bob chuckled as he watched Kiley’s eyes start to close after the meal. He realized how exhausted she must be. When her head nodded to the side, Bob gently picked her up and tucked her into his bed. “Just you wait little love. I’ll make you mine yet.” He kissed her forehead and retrieved her saltwater drenched uniforms.
The next morning Kiley was surprised by the delivery of freshly washed and ironed uniforms. Breakfast was served shortly after the delivery. With the breakfast Kiley found a note.
Good Morning Love. You can’t imagine how happy you have made me to be with you these few hours. I am more convinced than ever that we were meant to be. When this war is over, I intend to pursue you to the ends of the earth. Never thought I’d have to thank the Nazis for a thing, but I thank them for sending you to me this day. I’ll see you tonight.
Love,
Bob
“I appreciate you going to collect Kiley,” Mark told Dallas. “She’ll be in your capable hands. God, she must have been through so much.”
“Still her stiff upper lip stuff,” Dallas commented. “Don’t worry General. I’ll take good care of her.”
“I only wish I could bring her myself.”
“If you did you would bring the press and gossip. You are far too important and busy to deal with that,” Dallas said wisely.
Payton Lee ?????????? 73
“It would be unfair to Kiley,” Mark muttered. “Gossip about her and an old man.”
“What was that?” Dallas asked buttoning his jacket and straightening his tie.
“Nothing,” Mark replied. “My plane is ready. Sean will drive you to the tarmac.”
“Well I’m off,” Dallas smiled.
74 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Chapter 10
The knock at the door startled Kiley. She thought it might be Bob taking her to late lunch. She was surprised to open the door to Dallas Stern.
“Dallas? What the Bloody Hell are you doing here?”
“I’ve come to collect you and safely fly you to Algiers headquarters,” Dallas answered with a large grin. “I’ve the general’s private plane waiting for us.”
“I’m not packed,” Kiley managed to say through her surprise.
“Get cracking,” Dallas ordered cheerily. “I’ve a schedule to keep.”
Kiley quickly packed her other uniform, the gifts Bob had purchased for her including his silk pajamas. “Sweet man.” She penned a quick note for him.
Bob,
Thank you for the sweet man you are. I do believe you will pursue me to the ends of the earth after this war. You’ve softened me to the point I may consider your proposal. Until then, stay well.
Yours sincerely,
Kiley
“Oscar,” Martie trilled. “Mark brought that woman with him to Gibraltar.”
“I’ve heard,” Oscar replied. He was going through some of his papers on his desk. “What brings you to the office?”
Martie closed the door. “Mark’s lawyers are proceeding with the divorce. I’m expected to sign the final papers in a month or two.”
“I’ll see what I can do,” Oscar sympathized.
“I need you to leak to the press about this Burke woman,” Martie snarled. “I will give the public image of the long suffering
Payton Lee ?????????? 75
wife and Mark will look like a idiot pursuing a relationship with a woman nearly half his age.”
“Not a bad plan at all,” Oscar agreed. “You do play the long suffering wife so well.”
“Exactly! Mark’s position has opened many social doors previously closed to me. I have no intention of giving all that up.”
“I’ll see to it the press will get hold of it,” Oscar commented. “First I have to see if we can use that against him.”
“What is that supposed to mean?” Martie barked angrily.
“I’ve received news she was on a ship that was torpedoed. She may not have survived.”
“That won’t do. I need the gossip for sympathy.”
“All you need is me,” Oscar implied suggestively. “Tonight?”
Martie leaned over his desk. “Definitely!”
“I’ll find out about the broad. I’ll pull some markers to get those lawyers to ease off for awhile.”
“When will you find out about that woman? How long will it take?”
“Sometimes it takes weeks to find out names of survivors,” Newhall explained. “I’ll pull some rank to find out quickly.”
Arriving in Algiers, Dallas and Kiley quickly disembarked from the general’s private plane. A military car was waiting and drove them to headquarters.
Dallas took Kiley’s arm as she emerged from the car. He took her directly to Hauser.
“Your package as ordered, sir!” Dallas exclaimed. “Excuse me while I retrieve the lady’s luggage.” He quickly departed the room.
Kiley felt awkward standing in the general’s office. It was like she was being presented.
Mark removed his glasses and placed them on the pile of papers on his desk. He rose from his chair and walked to Kiley. “You gave us quite a scare.”
“Sorry about that. Of course being sunk wasn’t on my itinerary either,” Kiley snipped.
“Always the temper,” Mark chuckled. “I’ve missed that.” He took Kiley by her hands and pulled her into his embrace. “I couldn’t believe my feelings when they told me the Dart Moor had
76 ?????????? Five Star Affair
been sunk. You’re safe.” Mark pulled her tighter into his frame and kissed her lightly on the forehead.
Kiley found herself relaxing in Mark’s embrace. It felt safe. The most wonderful memories of her life were when she felt safe, as rare as those moments were. “What were your feelings?”
“I thought about not seeing you again. I would miss your acerbic tongue. More importantly I would miss your perceptions. You’ve been so helpful to me. I’m a selfish man. I didn’t want to lose you. You are a great help to me.”
“I guess I’m glad to be back. At least I know I’m needed and helping in the war effort,” Kiley responded wistfully.
“You are needed,” Mark reassured. He couldn’t stop holding her. How could even he understand his feelings? When he was told her boat was sunk, his heart sank with it. A deep sense of fear and grief had gripped him. His only safe answer had to be that Kiley was like a daughter to him.
“In that case, I’d best get back to work. I imagine your correspondence is back logged,” Kiley remarked pulling away from his arms. Feeling safe was too addictive. Reality didn’t offer her safety. “Where is my assigned workplace at these headquarters?”
“Right out front across from Dallas,” Mark answered. He felt a bit foolish for allowing his feelings to be so apparent. Quickly switching to his poker face he sat back down at his desk. “If you feel up to it, you can get to work right away.”
Kiley knew which desk was hers as soon as she walked through the large double doors. It was the desk stacked high with personal letters. She delved into the pile happily content to fill her mind with work.
Two hours letter she returned to Mark’s office. “There are three letters here from your daughter. They must have been mixed into the other letters. I thought you’d want them.”
“Thanks.” Hauser took the envelopes. “I was wondering why she hadn’t written to me in awhile.”
“You are very fond of her,” Kiley noted.
“You see how perceptive you are?” Mark grinned. “Perceive this. Tonight we will celebrate your safe return to the staff with a dinner party. Leave early tonight and go buy yourself a new pretty party dress. I don’t want the spinster celebrating with us tonight. Got that?”
Payton Lee ?????????? 77
“Got it!” Kiley replied. She found herself smiling. A party! How delightful and fun. “All I have to do is find my billet. I’ll ask Dallas where my clothes will lay.”
“You’re staying with the rest of the staff. You’ll be here on the seventh floor. All our quarters are on that floor.”
Shopping in Algiers was exciting. The exclusive shops were filled with French creations. Kiley felt like splurging and after her dunking in the Mediterranean she wanted to feel feminine. She selected a slinky beaded satin dress that would pop eyes out as the clerk put it. The dress was a soft pastel green. In the evening she poured herself into the form fitting dress. When she looked at her image in the mirror she immediately became self-conscious. It was too late to change. Dallas was at the door. Once again he had been sent to be her escort.
Kiley wondered about Dallas. Hauser always selected him to bring her to parties, or take her to his private dinners. He never sent Sergeant Ryan, General Linden Matthews, General Randall Jones, or even Admiral Durham. Colonel Dallas Stern was always the man Hauser sent to take her anywhere in public.
Dallas stood with his mouth open when Kiley opened the door. “I um er ah well I’m here to pick up Kiley Burke,” he stuttered. “By the way, how did you get through security and who are you?”
“Jolly good bit of a joke, Dallas.”
“Kiley? I mean you resemble Kiley. Is that really you?”
“Oh do get on with it! I’ll get my wrap.”
Dallas stood in silence watching Kiley move in that dress. The gentleman he was forced him to place her wrap on her shoulders. “Kiley, if my heart wasn’t taken. You would be the temptation of its beating.”
“Is that a compliment soldier?” Kiley quipped walking to the elevator.
“Good God no! That is an oath.”
“Whoa!” Harry strangled out as he watched Dallas enter with Kiley. “Where did Dallas find that knockout? Think she might be more interested in a General than a Colonel?”
Randall added to the interest, “Cut my drooling tongue.”
78 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Mark’s eyes rounded in anger. Where was Kiley? He had ordered Dallas to fetch Kiley.
“I’ll be damned!” Randall chortled. “That knockout bears a resemblance to Kiley Burke. Mark, does Kiley have a beautiful younger sister?”
“If she does, I say fire Kiley and hire her sister,” Harry added.
Mark rose when they neared the table. He couldn’t believe it. The woman on Dallas’ arm was Kiley. He pulled the chair next to him for her to be seated. He whispered as she accepted the seat, “I asked you to get rid of the spinster. I don’t think this old man’s heart can bear the new siren.”
Much to Hauser’s consternation, Harry paid undue attention to Kiley. Harry’s attention not only angered Hauser and Kiley. His blatant attention irritated Jane Dover. She was Harry’s WAC mistress.
The other staff WAC guests weren’t too thrilled with the attention Kiley received either.
Kiley promised herself she would never dress like that ever again. She didn’t want to make jealous enemies of her WAC friends. Kiley played down the attention to the best of her ability.
The dinner lasted for hours including the after dinner drinks.
Mark made the decision to end the dinner party. He assisted Kiley to rise and put her arm in his.
It was obvious to Kiley that Dallas would not be assigned to cart her back and forth this evening. Instead, the general escorted her to an unmarked military car and assisted her inside. He sat next to her and the driver shut the door.
“Drive around the city a bit, soldier,” Mark ordered. “I’m not ready to return to the hotel yet.”
The young soldier saluted.
“He’ll get us lost. Your young drivers always get you lost,” Kiley teased.
“Tonight I hope he does,” Mark retorted. He put his arm around Kiley and drew her into his muscled chest. “You never cease to amaze me, Kiley Burke. When you walked in with Dallas, every male in that room was drooling.”
“Including you?” Kiley quipped.
“I was furious that he didn’t bring Kiley Burke as ordered.”
Payton Lee ?????????? 79
“You didn’t recognize me?”
“Not until you were close enough to be eaten by the brass wolves,” Mark laughed. “Burke, what am I going to do with you? How long have you hidden this Kiley?”
“Forever. There is a small devil that brings her out occasionally. The real Kiley is a little mouse that likes to hide away in her books.”
“Make sure you control that little devil. I don’t think I can keep all the wolves at bay for a great length of time. I need to concentrate on Nazi wolves, not Allied ones,” Mark chuckled. “Besides, I prefer the little mouse and her books.”
“Do you really general?” Kiley asked hopefully.
“I most certainly do,” Mark answered quickly. “It’s that little mouse that is intelligent and perceptive. She quickly helps sort out those social climbing and irritating people that knock on my door. Don’t doubt for a minute that I prefer little mouse Burke. She’s quite valuable to me.”
“You say the sweetest things,” Kiley sighed and snuggled into his embrace.
Mark couldn’t believe he had the most beautiful woman in Algiers in his arms. At the moment she looked the part, but she definitely was a beautiful woman through and through. Could he dare love again? The last time he relaxed his barriers he married a flirtatious Martie Maxwell. She had created a living hell for him. Is that what love is about? Is that what marriage is about? Social climbing? Public image? The selfish needs and wants of a partner? For this night he wouldn’t worry about it. He cared for Kiley. He had admitted that when he learned her ship had been sunk. If that was paternal love or something more fragile, he didn’t know or care about the answer. Kiley was back in his arms and it felt right. His hand gently rubbed her arm. She felt like silk. She smelled of fresh lilacs. Everything felt right. As they drove through the city, Mark pointed out several landmarks. He shared with her everything that had happened while they were separated.
The driver finally pulled in front of the hotel.
“I’ll walk you to your room,” Mark stated when they entered the hotel.
“You needn’t bother. You must be very tired. I know where my room is,” Kiley excused.
“No bother at all. Your room is next to mine.”
80 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Kiley stopped short and looked directly into the general’s eyes. “People will talk.”
“Does that bother you?” Mark asked. Was Kiley like all women? Did she only care for money, power, and image? He had to find out.
“Frankly my dear, I don’t give a damn,” Kiley parroted a famous movie line. “It is going to give your press secretary a headache. I happen to like Dallas. He’s a gentleman and totally devoted to you.”
“I don’t give a damn either Miss Burke,” Mark chuckled. “It is just like you to be concerned for others. We’ll manage the gossips somehow.”
Stopping in front of her door he wanted very much to enter it and savor her female attributes. He cut himself short. He was old enough to be her father. It was paternal feelings he had for Kiley. He had to keep telling himself that. “Good night, Kiley. Get some rest.”
“You too, general.” Kiley nearly ripped her clothes off and sought the security of her soft bed. The thoughts running through her mind were torture. She wanted Mark to want her as a woman. She had to be crazy. The last time she wanted to be a woman was with her husband. That marriage was hell on earth once he had a ring on her finger. “No! Never Again!” Kiley shouted into the pillow. Men were evil. Her husband was proof of that.
The initial invasion had worked well. There were Christmas and New Year celebrations. Now the Allied troops were stalled. Rommel was like a vicious animal fighting for its life. Everyone in headquarters was testy.
Like clockwork, Kiley heard the general swearing as calls came in from the front. She wasn’t surprised when summoned to Hauser’s office.
“I’ll be leaving for Casablanca in the morning.” Hauser announced.
“You’ll be meeting with your President then,” Kiley stated. She was aware of all the security plans and memos. Although the meeting with Churchill and Roosevelt was top secret, Hauser had to be informed of the visit. He would be a part of the plan.
“I may not be back,” Hauser said quietly. It was important to him to have Kiley understand that his job may be on the line. It
Payton Lee ?????????? 81
was three months since they landed in Africa and they still didn’t have Bizerte or Tunisia. He felt he failed as a commander. He would understand if FDR removed him from command. It was strange his regret was that he wouldn’t be seeing Kiley again.
“You’re worried that you will be removed as commander of the ETO?” Kiley implied handing the general a cigarette.
Hauser took the cigarette and nodded.
“You think you’ve bungled it. Darlan didn’t help one bit in securing those airfields you so desperately needed.”
“Goddammit Kiley, I wish my generals were as perceptive as you are. We’d already be in Berlin.”
“And we will be with you in command. Look at what you’ve done. You’ve managed to bring British and American forces to work together. That is a feat no other man was capable of getting done. You did it! Don’t think for a minute that Roosevelt and Churchill aren’t aware of it. They are. They both know of no one else that could pull that off and keep it working.”
“You really believe that don’t you?” Mark asked.
“Every word. You have a lovely flight. Take a small vacation. Have a good time and give my regards to the PM and your President.”
“That does it then!”
“I’ll see you in a week or two. If you excuse me, I have mountains of correspondence to deal with.”
Mark watched her leave the room and whispered to her back. “You are the best, Kiley Burke. You always pick me up when I am down.”
82 ?????????? Five Star Affair
Chapter 11
Two nights later Kiley was wakened gently from a sound sleep. She rubbed her eyes and focused on the face of the voice softly calling her name. “General?”
“I wanted to let you know I almost didn’t make it back. You could have been wrong. I’m glad you weren’t.”
“I know I’m half asleep and you may be a dream, but would you mind explaining the statement? I’m a bit foggy,” Kiley complained. She started to sit up on the bed leaning on the pillow placed against the backboard of the bed.
“The B-17 I was flying in almost didn’t make it to Casablanca. The pilot managed to glide into the runway. Two of the four engines were down.”
“My God,” Kiley gasped. “Are you hurt? We didn’t hear anything about it.” Without thinking Kiley placed her hands on Mark’s face. She leaned forward placing her lips on his. “I’m so glad you made it back safely.”
“So am I,” Mark agreed returning the kiss. His kiss was deeper. His arms went around Kiley. His kiss changed from the warmth of welcome to the heat of passion.
Kiley fell into the abyss of the moment. She floated into the oblivion of love.
Mark found the kiss created a hunger. It was the hunger of a starving man. As a man he had never felt this filling of emptiness. His hands buried themselves in Kiley’s hair. His lips left hers. He tasted her eyebrows, eyes, lashes, nose, ears, lobes, and finally her throat.
Kiley bared her throat to his lips. His hands caressed her hair. Did she dare believe a man could love her? No that was silly. This was a physical moment. A moment she intended to enjoy.
