Let's learn some Turkish... 

Generally speaking ; the commonly spoken language in city centers and the west part of the country is English; because of the high number of Germans in the south part, German more common around Antalya. In tourist areas you would not have any difficulty in communicating with people. Even people may speak French, Italian, Spanish and Dutch. In case you are traveling in the Black sea or east part of the country, to know some Turkish words would very much help you to communicate. 

Turkish people are very friendly and warm so they behave very closely and touchy ( ! by the way Turkish man kiss each other, so do not think they are Gay. This shows the closeness between people) . People may wish to have a communication with you, even some do like to show they speak a foreign language or use the possibility of doing some language practice. Do not get anxious if people start to ask questions like " Where are you from ?", "Is it the first time in Turkey ?", "Where do you stay ?" , "What is your name?". This is just the habit of trying to chat... By the way, incase a Turkish person hear a Turkish word from a foreigner they would very much like that.

Turkish is a easy language to speak and read. It is written as it is pronounced. Just read the word in your own alphabet (in case it is the Latin one), you would nearly pronounce it perfect . There are several exception letters that you need to take care while speaking:

In addition to c,g,i,o,s,u letters there are the "ç"(tche), "g"(hh), "i"(ae), "ö"(?), "s"(sche), "ü"(?).

Also the Turkish alphabet does not have the "x,q and w" letters.

There are 29 letters in the Turkish Alphabet: A-B-C-Ç-D-E-F-G-G-H-I-I-J-K-L-M-N-O-Ö-P-R-S-S-T-U-Ü-V-Y-Z

Below you would find some words that might help you during your stay in Turkey....

 
Everyday phrases and polite expressions...

The reply to  Hos Geldiniz (welcome) is Hos bulduk (find well, thanks).

 

Hello : Merhaba
 

 	Good morning : Günaydin
 

 	Good evening : iyi aksamlar
 

Please: Lütfen
 

 	Thank you : Tesekkürler or Merci
 

 	
How are you: Nasilsiniz 
I am fine, Thank you : iyiyim Tesekkürler
 
Yes : Evet
 

 	There is : Var
 

 	There is not : Yok
 

No : Hayir
 

 	I want : istiyorum
 

 	


Numbers

1: Bir                        11:Onbir                 100: Yüz

2: Iki                        20:Yirmi                  111:Yüzonbir

3: Üç                        25:Yirmibes             200:ikiyüz

4: Dört                     30: Otuz                  1000: Bin

5: Bes                      40: Kirk                   10.000:Onbin

6: Alti                      50: Elli                     1.000.000:Birmilyon

7: Yedi                     60:Atmis

8: Sekiz                   70:Yetmis

9: Dokuz                  80:Seksen

10: On                     90: Doksan

 
Week Days 

Sunday...Pazar
Monday...Pazartesi
Tuesday...Sali
Wednesday...Çarsamba
Thursday...Persembe
Friday...Cuma
Saturday...Cumartesi
 
The Time


When?...Ne zaman?
Yesterday/today...Dün, bugün
Tomorrow...Yarin
Morning, afternoon...Sabah, Ögleden sonra
Evening/Night...Aksam, gece
One hour...Bir saat
What is the time?...Saat kaç?
At what time?...Saat kaçta?

 
While travelling, in Hotel or in Restaurant...


Airport.....Hava alani
A room.....Bir oda
Port...Liman
Two people.....iki kisi
City centre.....Sehir merkezi
Where is it?.....Nerede?
What is the price?.....Fiyati nedir?
Is it far?.....Uzak mi?
Hot water.....Sicak su
Tourism bureau.....Turizm bürosu
A supplementary bed.....ilave bir yatak
Repair garage.....Tamirci
Good hotel.....iyi bir otel
Breakfast.....Kahvalti
Butter.....Yag
Attention.....Dikkat
Coffee.....Kahve
Tea.....Çay
Light Tea.....Açik Çay
Milk.....Süt
Sugar.....Seker
The bill.....Hesap
Shopping.....Alisveris
How much is it?.....Bu ne kadar?
It is very expensive.....Çok pahali
It is cheap: Bu ucuz
I like it: Begendim
I do not like it.....Begenmedim
Pharmacy: Eczane
Shopping center: Carsi
Cash machine: Bankamatik
Bank: Banka
Bread.....Ekmek
Meat.....Et
Water.....Su
Mutton.....Koyun eti
Mineral water.....Maden suyu
Lamb.....Kuzu eti
Fruit juice.....Meyva Suyu
Beef.....Sigir eti
Wine.....Sarap
Veal.....Dana eti
Beer.....Bira
Chicken.....Piliç, Tavuk
Ice.....Buz
Fish.....Balik  
     

Source : Richard Chambers / Chicago University

Since 1928, Turkish has been written in a slightly modified Latin alphabet which is very nearly phonetic.

The Turkish alphabet has 8 vowels (A E I I O Ö U Ü ) and 21 consonants. The letters Q,W and X do not exist in Turkish. Most letters are pronounced pretty much as you would expect, but some are not. Once the phonetic value of all letters is known, then it is rather easy to pronounce any word one sees or to spell any word one hears.The following letters require explanation:

Aa = "a" as in "card" or "dark", never as "a" in"cat" or "back" ( kan = blood )

Cc = "J" as in "judge" ( can= life, soul, pronounced like "John" )

Çç = "ch" as in "church"( çay= tea, pronounced "chay", rhymes with "buy" )

Ee = "e" as in "bed" ( ekmek =bread )

Gg = "g" as in "get" ( gelin =bride )

G ( yumusak ge [soft g] Never appears as the first letter in a word; essentially silent; sometimes lengthens preceding vowel; sometimes pronounced like "y" in "yet"
(dag =mountain, pronounced daa , rhymes with the "baa" of "baa baa black sheep";
diger =other, pronounced diyer )

li( undotted "i" ) "u" as in "radium" or "i" as in "cousin" (isik =ligth, irmak = river )

Ii( dotted "i" ) ="i" as in "sit" ( bir = one, pronounced like "beer" )

Jj = "j" as in "azure" (garaj = garage, pronounced as in French & English )

Oo = "o" as in "fold"(okul =school )

Öö German "ö" as in "König" or French "eu" as in "peur"( göl = lake, rhymes with furl)

Ss="s" as in "sing", never pronounced like a "z" as the "s" in "his"(ses = voice)

Ss="sh"as in "ship" (sey = thing, pronounced "shey" , rhymes with "hay")

Uu "oo" as in "boot" (buz = ice, pronounced like "booze")

Üü German "ü" as in "für" or French "u" as in "tu" (gül = rose)

Zz="z" as in "zoo" (beyaz = white)

Turkish belongs to the Turkic branch of the Altaic language family. The earliest Turkic inscriptions date from the 7th century C.E. and Islamic texts written in Turkic appear in the 11th century. Turkish, the language of modern Turkey, is spoken by about 60 million people. Other important Turkic languages are Azeri (15 million speakers) and Uzbek (14 million speakers). Turkish formerly used the same alphabet as Arabic, but has been written in the Latin alphabet since 1928 as mentioned above; since 1940, Azeri and Uzbek have been written in Cyrillic but efforts are now under way to replace it with Latin.

As an Altaic language, Turkish has virtually nothing in common with English or other Indo-European languages except for some loan words, usually from French or English.

Turkish grammar is complex, but also quite regular. Its two most characteristic features are : (1) vowel harmony (vowels within a word follow certain harmonic patterns) and (2) agglutination (addition suffixes to words.) Through this process, astoundingly long word phrases can be encountered. For example, the following means, "Maybe you are one of those whom we were not able to Turkify."

Türklestiremedikimizlerdensinizdir.

Another interesting feature is that there is no gender in Turkish. The same word , "o", for example, means "he", "she" and "it".

Turks generally call each other by their given names. For example, a man whose name is Ahmet Kuran would be called Ahmet bey ( bey = Mr.), and his wife whose name is Ayse Kuran would be called Ayse hanim ( hanim =Ms.). Good friends drop the "bey" and "hanim". But a letter would be addressed to Bay ve Bayan Ahmet Kuran (Mr. and Mrs...).
SHOULD TURKEY JOIN THE EU?
THE ANTI TURKISH STANCE OF THE FRENCH UMP AND GERMAN CDU/CSU

Marcel H. VAN HERPEN

Director, The Cicero Foundation

Recently the biggest French government party, the UMP, has taken the official position that Turkey should not be offered the perspective of EU membership during the Brussels European Council meeting of December 2004. With this position the UMP joins the German opposition parties CDU and CSU that have taken identical positions. The reasons invoked by adversaries of Turkish EU membership are manifold. Let us mention some of them:

Turkey is not a European country
Turkey, as an Islamic country, does not fit into 'Christian' Europe
Turkey is too poor
Turkish membership will lead to a massive influx of new migrants
Turkey is not a fully fledged democracy
Turkey is too big
Turkish membership will stop further integration
How valid are these arguments? That the bigger part of Turkey is situated in Asia can be verified with a simple glance at the map. But this is only a formal argument. In fact Turkey has been an important geopolitical player on the European chessboard for more than six centuries. First was it considered as a threat, against which Luther wrote his pamphlet "On War Against the Turk". But these times have evolved: the last half century Turkey was a close European ally in NATO. 

Turkey is, of course, an Islamic country. So are Albania and Bosnia that are on the list to join the EU. Turkish Islam is not only known to be moderate and tolerant (when the Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492 they went to Amsterdam and… Constantinople), but since Atatürk's reforms it is also banned from the public sphere. Turkey is, as France, and maybe even more than Germany (where the state still collects the Kirchensteuer - the church tax), a secular state. It is telling that the 'Islamic' party in power is one of the most modernising and pro-European parties in recent Turkish history.

Turkey, of course, is relatively poor. In 2002 its GDP per capita was 2600 US dollars, which was only 53 percent of Poland, one of the poorest new member states. Turkish EU membership, however, will certainly boost its economic development, as has been the case in other poor acceding countries, such as Portugal, Spain and Ireland (Ireland has now the third highest GDP per capita in the EU!). 
The argument that Turkish membership will lead to a massive influx of migrants is often used in connection with the last one. A poor country, so goes the argument, will export its population. One may, however, expect that the push and pull factors that determine migratory flows will diminish with economic development. People prefer to stay in their country, and even in their region, if they can earn there a decent living. This is not different for Turks. 

Turkey is, indeed, not yet a fully fledged democracy. But in a recent past this was also the case for present EU member states as Spain, Portugal, and Greece. And it was equally the case for the eight (out of ten) new member states with a communist past. Together with the GDR, which was absorbed by the Federal Republic, that makes 12 out of 25 member states that had problems with their democratic credentials. This is, of course, not a reason to take this argument not seriously: Turkey still has to implement many of its new laws and - especially - has to bring once and for all the military under civilian, political control. The prospect of EU membership will be a strong incentive to strengthen democracy and to make the necessary changes. 

Is Turkey too big? Turkey will, indeed, be the second biggest member country after Germany as regards population and could even become the biggest one in the near future. In 1850 some Americans found California too big to be integrated as a new state into the Union. It happened nevertheless and it was beneficial for the Californians, as well as for their fellow Americans. As California did with America, Turkey will do with the EU: it will give the EU a continental dimension and an immediate presence in one of the world's pivotal regions.
Comes, finally, the argument that Turkish membership will hinder further integration and will fundamentally change the EU from a political project into a simple free trade zone. There is, however, no reason to believe that such a development will take place. Until now every enlargement has led to a deepening of integration. This not because of some automatic functionalist spillover, but for the simple reason that the system otherwise would not work. It is not clear why this would change with the entrance of Turkey.

The real question that has to be asked is if there are not some hidden reasons for the UMP and the CDU/CSU to oppose Turkish membership. Turkey may, indeed, be too big: not for being integrated, but as a potential power factor. In the 1960s De Gaulle vetoed twice British membership, because the entrance of Britain would change the existing power balance in the Europan Community. Recently France and Germany were forced to open their duopoly to include Britain into a Directory of the Big Three. With the entrance of Turkey a new important player would appear. Do the UMP and the CDU/CSU fear that a Turkish membership would further dilute the Franco-German dominance over the EU and strengthen 'New Europe' versus 'Old Europe'?

Paris, 1 May 2004 
Turkish President Abdullah Gul's Lecture on 'Turkish Foreign Policy in the New Era' at USAK House
Turkish President Abdullah Gul delivered a speech on "Turkish Foreign Policy in the New Era" at International Strategic Research Organization (USAK). The full-text of the speech is available: 

___________________

04 November, 2009

Dear President, 
Honored USAK members, 
Honored Guests, 


First of all, I would to greet you with respect and well wishes. Also, I am very pleased to be here for the opening of USAK’s new building. Since 2004, USAK has operated successfully as an independent think-tank in the fields of politics, economy, law, social sciences, security, and informs the public with true and sufficient news. I believe that USAK fulfills an important responsibility; hence, I would like to express my appreciation and wishes for success to USAK President Dr. Sedat Laçiner and to his colleagues. 


I am absolutely confident that USAK will continue these important activities with more enthusiasm in its new building. 

Dear Guests, 

As you know, I am an academician as well. But I worked for more than four years as the Foreign Affairs Minister. I worked in the European Council Parliamentary Assembly for more than ten years. Since 2007, in the framework of my Presidential duties, I have been in the middle of a very intensive foreign affairs agenda. 

That’s why I am saying that as a member of the opposition party, as a member of the ruling party, as a member of parliament, as a Prime Minister, as a Minister and at present as a President, I have taken responsibility in different positions with the Foreign Affairs issues. 
I was working as an economist in the Islamic Development Bank in the 1980s. There was no such thing called e-mail at that time. We were using other communication means for communicating with our opponents and other countries. When I was elected as a Member of Parliament and became a European Commission Parliamentary Assembly member, the European Council did not yet have a web-site. But now, we can find, see and read all the reports and all other important materials and also we can send our feedback about these reports and important materials. 

Twenty years have passed. Together, we are realizing how everything has changed in that time. Today, there is tremendous information and news traffic. I just wanted to remind you of these progressions. TV channels, newspapers’ online web-sites, news sites are sharing all the news and what’s going even in the remote parts of the world. Almost like watching a football match, we are watching the important news of the world. 
Now, the ongoing process of transformation and change, no doubt, requires a serious adaptation. Everyone should adapt him/herself to these transformations and changes. Because today, information is not only under the monopoly of official authorities. In contrast, civil channels are gaining importance day by day. We can use Google in order to see inside buildings, see the gardens of places that we could never get closer to. In this context, of course, public diplomacy is attracting more and more attention in terms of foreign policy. Furthermore, only doing the right thing is not enough; the reasons for following policies should be properly explained. This is not only about foreign policies, but is also valid for the governance of the country. Because people are watching their representatives on TV, following them in live broadcasts; ‘What’s he saying? What did he promise me? What’s he doing there? What did he promise about how he would behave and in what way he is putting his hands up when he is voting for something?’ Hence, there is a fantastic atmosphere of transparency. This is valid both for foreign and domestic politics. 

Therefore, in my opinion, think-tanks and research organizations like USAK are playing very important roles by expressing society’s ideas, views and suggestions to influence the decision making processes and are also playing an important role to explain, to describe official policies to the domestic and foreign public. These are the things that I mean when I mention keeping pace with the requirements of the century. 

Here, I strongly believe that we should pay attention to two subjects. One of them, raising Turkey’s standards in technology and industry to the level of advanced industrialized nations is surely a prerequisite for world competition. 

There are big and important improvements in adopting technology for both the public and private sector in Turkey. Turkey possesses the technology of the most developed countries, especially in informatics technology. But assuming the possession of technological improvements alone is sufficient is wrong. Adapting ourselves will provide intellectual transformation. Of course it’s not easy. We are taking technology and adopting it, but intellectual transformation takes time and requires the process of convincing people. 

When we look at the subject in terms of foreign politics, I would especially like to underscore the importance of think-tanks and research organizations. I believe that in order to be able to understand the deep, complex, and multidimensional global, political and economic relations, we need to have active associations and mechanisms. Think-tank and research organizations together with official associations are very important for explaining and defining the government’s policies to the international community and the public. 

In the modern world, it is more important for countries to explain themselves by using civil channels than by official channels. Moreover, it is more effective to explain your issues with civil channels; it leads to quicker results and it is more long lasting because people who are taking official responsibility, such as the President, Prime Minister, Minister, Ambassador or any other official, will explain the stance of his country from the official point of view no matter if he believes in it or not. Thus, it is not that effective. But when civil society, scientists, men of thought, journalists explain these issues faithfully, then it is more convincing. Likewise, again MP’s meeting together with their interlocutors and discussing in a free atmosphere gives better results. In this context, I give much importance to think-tanks and research organizations. 

Also, I would like to express that in developed countries, in big countries, in progressive countries, one of the factors that makes these countries powerful is the existence of study centers, think-tanks and research organizations. Turkey is a little bit late at that point as the USAK President mentioned previously. But today, what is attracting is to see that these kinds of good ‘think-tank’s are being established. I am really very pleased to see these improvements and today I came here to support these activities. Because in developed, large and powerful countries, think-tanks such as CFR and Chatham House are very important and quite serious subjects have been discussed behind their closed doors. As a person who knows very well what they say, how they talk in these institutes and organizations, and how their ideas are applied to politics, I care that these kinds of activities are realized in our country. There are valuable diplomats, journalists, scientists among you. I see and know them from these kinds of meetings and consequently I would like to encourage people who know the importance, significance and necessity of these activities. 

Dear Guests, 
Last week, we celebrated the 86th anniversary of the foundation of the Turkish Republic. In fact, to a large extent there is an agreement on the basic principles of our constitution, and our having a state governed by rule of law together with democratic, and secular principles. If we look back to the early days, it is easy to see the progress made by our country. I believe that at the end of this century, a very powerful Turkey will be at stake. I believe that we are developing on the way to this progress. Under these circumstances, what I believe is that there should be a free atmosphere for discussions on internal and external issues. If countries cannot resolve their problems by discussing them in an open, transparent environment then those problems will be transferred as burdens to next generations' shoulders. In this respect, I am pleased to see a lively debate atmosphere in Turkey today. I think all the results of these debates will lead to progress in Turkey. Because the foundation of Turkey is so strong. Because the basic ideas of Turkey are so strong. 

When it comes to foreign policy issues, I would like to tell you this: Our country, with our joint efforts, is increasingly becoming a global center of interest. According to our spending parity, if we look at the GNP of a trillion dollars, it will be easy to realize that Turkey is a center of interest. Nevertheless, our economic power together with political influence and growing population enables Turkey to allocate more resources for international relations, to play a determining and transmitting role and makes the efforts to establish welfare and stability easier. Thanks to this, extending from Asia to Africa, Turkey is an appreciated country in terms of the humanitarian and technical aid it provides. I just want you to note that once Turkey was the recipient country. I would like to remind you that today Turkey is in the club of aiders and has made donations totaling one billion dollars just in terms of humanitarian aid. Whereupon, our temporary membership to the UN Security Council was realized with phenomenal support, and we do our best to do our proportion of work there. 
The weight of our state in the international arena, its stance on issues, the foreign policy direction are permanent factors. We should not forget that this is a relay race and a win-win game. This will be at the top of the internal policy agenda. For sure, the whole world appreciates that Turkey, with a Muslim majority population, managed to establish rules and associations based on democracy and a free market economy, to take crucial steps towards transparency and cultural rights. However, they will be most appreciated by our own people. All these are not the efforts to win the admiration of the world or to attract attention, but the good things done to pay back to our own people and I would like this to be perceived in this way. Since the foundation of the republic, Turkey has been a role model for all the world with its democratic and secular system, and contemporary cultural identity. I believe that we should act with the awareness of this responsibility. 

Pursuant to Atatürk's noble principle of “peace at home, peace in the world”, we keep on following multidimensional, comprehensive, responsible and ethical policies. Turkish foreign policy is not focused on pure interests. Turkey has the right and the authority to indicate its right and wrongs honestly. The prestigious past and specific regional relations of Turkey gives it the responsibility to criticise even its allies and defend the rightful things in any case. In case of necessity, Turkey is able to warn its allies by taking the “true friend tells the painful truth unsparingly” policy into consideration. Yet, while doing this it gives great importance not to damage the basis of friendly relations. In this respect, our foreign policy is ethical and moral. Turkey acts in the framework of law and legitimacy. I believe that it is so important. Because of your ethical behaviour, even they oppose your ideas, they respect you and you will not find yourself in difficulties. Just so, you have the capability to continue your ethical behaviour. Democracy, human rights, pacta sunt servanta are our priorities. Both our distant and recent history is full of examples of these kinds of activities. 

In case of necessity, the Turkish Grand National Assembly as the symbol of national freedom and will has bravely made decisions which cannot be made by most of the assemblies all over the world. Even in its days of weakness Turkey managed to make brave foreign policy moves despite the big countries' oppositions. Turkey continues this ethical and moral behaviour today, as well. Our main goal is to promote stability, security and welfare to preserve our national interests. In order to reach this goal, peaceful resolution of conflicts with active and proactive diplomatic initiatives is necessary. 

Turkey is at a very effective geopolitical location. There are lots of conflicts surrounding us. With no doubt, these can be resolved with mutual efforts. It is not realistic or fair to wait for bilateral good faith gestures. Thus, there should not be a perception to wait for a complete resolution at any price. But also these problems cannot be solved by idleness, either. Thus, it is important to establish a flexibility and a sensitive balance between national interests applying for the foreign policies of all countries including Turkey. Basically, it is important to foster an atmosphere for regional and international dialogue which constitutes a common denominator protecting both sides’ interests to solve the problems with a win-win game understanding rather than having a zero sum game perception. Turkey, with its long-established experienced diplomacy understanding, has the capability, capacity and power to use this win-win oriented method of resolution. 

I would like to reiterate that some have perceptions of Turkey as in a muddle, asking questions such as “Where is Turkey going? Does it keep to the East or to the West?”. I frankly state that these are not the facts. What Turkey does is extremely obvious and clear. It of course keeps both to the east, to the west, to the north, to the south, and to everywhere. The significant point is the values of Turkey develops through each direction: democratic values, rule of law, respect to human rights, transparency, liability to render account, subjects on women-men equality, functioning of free market economy. 

In all of these topics, looking at Turkey’s path can help to better determine its direction. I believe that some of the other things have been written in good faith. The good faith is in terms of warning those who could not understand the value of Turkey and in terms of attracting attention to some of our friends. In my belief, some other written things include jealousy and some of them are results of lack of knowledge about this position and attitude of Turkey. Sometimes I read some ideas in articles that are off-the-wall. None of them are valid. Turkey knows what it is doing. As I mentioned before, the significant thing is according to which trends and to which direction Turkey is developing these internal values. If a short study is conducted about this topic, we can observe that Turkey is developing in a direction of improving all the values that I stated. Surely, there are some deficiencies. Surely, there are so many things to do. The pace, speed and height of this trend can be discussed, this is a separate issue. However, discussing the direction is mainly due to lack of knowledge. 
Secondly, I would like to emphasize that what Turkey wants to do in its region is to promote peace. Because there cannot be any economic development, cooperation or welfare in any region with no stability, security. The people of that country cannot be satisfied. Therefore, the first aim of Turkey in its relations with neighbors and the region is conflict resolution and promoting stability. On this basis, it wants to promote peace in a wide area and provide economic cooperation as much as possible. This is the way to welfare. In any region of the world, in which regional stability could not be established, one cannot see any kind of economic development since most of the resources are shifted to security matters. In this region, when Turkey’s historical background, location, and level of development are taken into consideration, we think that Turkey is responsible because of this and therefore Turkey will keep following its policies on this. 

As I previously mentioned, undoubtedly, this policy is not a zero sum game but a win-win game. Thus, not with a narrow understanding but with a broad one, it is possible to see that everyone’s interest lies here. I believe that there should be the same big rapid development in our region like the development that occurred immediately after the resolution of border conflicts, some other major issues, and security issues with OSCE decisions in Europe and Helsinki. Thus, Turkey should take the initiative when we consider the region more broadly other than with its border neighbors. Turkey does this in the Caucasus. Turkey also aims at the nuclear disarmament of Middle East and nuclear disarmament of our region. If this is properly addressed, I strongly believe it is possible to be done. 

As it can be remembered from 1990s First Gulf War, this issue was taken to the UN Security Council and there had been two attempts for it: Nuclear disarmament of the Middle East and of all the countries in Middle East matter. In my opinion, these issues should be addressed with determination. I believe that the unbending attitudes of the 5 permanent members of the UN Security Council, mainly the USA, will make all these developments possible. 

Dear Guests, 
It is not necessary to mention what kind of a government project is the process leading to Turkey’s EU membership. Sometimes we hear some unpleasant expressions about this issue, directly or indirectly. In fact, we do not take these into consideration. These expressions aim to derail Turkey. Turkey will not be derailed; I definitely want to say that, because juristic grounding is so strong. Turkey begins negotiations. When Turkey fulfills the criteria, surely, full membership will become true. Privileged or limited memberships are not valid in the concept of the EU. Moreover, this kind of a membership does not exist. This morning, I met with former Foreign Minister of Germany, Mr. Genscher. While discussing this issue, he said that Turkey is already a privileged member at a high degree. What can be possible beyond this? Turkey is a partner in foreign politics. It participates in EU’s foreign politics at 95 percent. This is the same in security issues. Our militaries are together in troubled areas of the world. In the framework of the Customs Union, for almost 15 years, we have reset the customs with most powerful industries in Europe. We are at a level to be able to compete. There is nothing beyond this. Stating beyond this is rhetoric and lack of faith for a future powerful Europe. 

You should go back to a Europe with 6 founding members if you adopt such behavior and such comments. However, Europe has already discussed these issues and got over them. Certainly, we cannot ignore the current difficulties happening in Europe. It is possible to observe such cyclical problems in Europe, like in every country. These problems should never cause strategies to change. At this point, Turkey is absolutely determined. Turkey will meet its responsibilities during negotiations. And the European Union will observe nothing else. Some people say to me “Europe is tired, so we have to stop for a while”. We do not expect Europe to do something! We just want Europe to watch us. It is for us to do something. Turkey is the one to implement reforms, not Europe. They will just say whether “okay, you achieved our standards” or “not”. Therefore, the feeling of pacta sunt servanda should be underlined. Because if countries or leaders think or give the feeling that their signature is a joke or they are not binding, then there will emerge large gaps in trust and a very dangerous situation. I believe that these kinds of things are temporary. Thus, Turkey will continue along its path decisively. 

As I mentioned in previous days, after Turkey’s completion of negotiations, some countries have already decided to go for a referendum We will respect their decisions. We cannot know what will be the decision of Turkish public at that time, as in the case of other countries. However, these issues are not to be discussed today. 

Dear participants, 
I lastly want to discuss this: Certainly, the US is at a very important point in Turkey’s foreign politics, and most of time, the agendas of Turkey and the US are overlapping in world related cases. Sometimes, as Foreign Minister or President of Turkey, I have asked US presidents to write down the issues that they are interested in. And I continued by saying that I would write down issues too and then we would put them together and see how many countries are there for which we have similar agendas. Actually, they are aware of this fact. There are couple of issues in which we are not interested. Now, due to our responsibilities in the UN Security Council, we have become interested in them too: those related with Korea and some others. 

Needless to say, Turkey is not a super power; its responsibility cannot be at the same scale as the US’s. However, Turkey also has very important responsibilities due to its geographical location and its historical relationships. It continues to conduct these issues with the USA on the basis of reciprocal respect, understanding and cooperation and it is content with this. In particular, President Obama’s first overseas visit to Turkey, which took place at the beginning of his official duty, became notably very beneficial. We have always had the chance to consult on all issues broadly and to transfer all our knowledge and experiences at the beginning of the matter. I argue that this period needs to be evaluated very well, because the President of the US announced something after he took office: “I will not act unilaterally, but we will act multilaterally, we will negotiate with our partners, listen to them and eventually, we will explain our decisions and we will be in a great solidarity.” This mentality led to a feeling of being at ease to the world. I hope that this mentality can be interpreted very well and allow for solutions to many chronic problems to be reached. The Middle East, the nuclear issues, in all these matters, the politics should be considered well. 

Finally, I want to express this: especially Afghanistan and Pakistan, or rather the issue of Afghanistan, the name of Pakistan is necessarily included with Afghanistan due to being its neighbour, but in fact, the issue belongs to Afghanistan. The Afghanistan case is similar to that of the Middle East, which is a great event and a global issue that the world is interested in. If things are going wrong, this can turn out to be more insurmountable problem. Therefore, close concern for this region is a common responsibility. We, as Turkey, are aware of our responsibility. Because of this, twice we undertook the responsibility for commandership of ISAF by ourselves. Now, three or four days ago, we took over the Regional Commandership of Kabul related to security issues. However, I believe this: as a person who often visits Afghanistan and knows this country, and as I pointed out in the meetings of NATO and in my speeches as the minister of Foreign Affairs and President, Afghanistan is not an issue that can be solved only by means of military and its methods. This problem cannot be concluded regardless of Afghan people’s sympathy. So far, much has been spent on military expenses. However, the fact is obvious. When I visited Afghanistan, I completely walked around Kabul. I also went outside of the city. I saw an international force, soldiers; American soldiers, the soldiers of NATO, Turkish soldiers, including Afghan soldiers. The poor clothes of Afghan soldiers and their needy conditions without helmets and boots, on the other side, the other soldiers with full equipment... These two kinds of soldiers act together; this strategy and policy are unacceptable. In fact, Afghans say, “train our soldiers, trust us, provide clothes and equipment, we do our job by ourselves, your children should not sacrifice themselves for us.” They say this very clearly. 

However, unfortunately, there is a weakness in this direction. For instance, when the matter comes to winning Afghan people’s hearts, frankly, no one acts as Turkey does. Without any doubts, we appreciate what has been done. I am saying as a comparison, I said that I walked around Kabul step by step; the streets of Kabul are muddy and people, children, women walk around these muddy places. I insist, “Let’s pave this, let’s win this society”, however, no fund could be provided. Now, Turkey has started paving Kabul through TIKA. This is winning one’s heart. Once upon a time, in a country where the girls were forbidden to go out, Turkish NGOs are now opening schools for thousands of girls. For example, I went to open a college for 2000 girls. Babacan had visited them in his period as Minister of Foreign Affairs. Davutoglu is travelling throughout Afghanistan. In this respect, Turkey is in close cooperation with Pakistan in order to solve the problems of Afghanistan. I am sure that you have watched closely. Three times, the Presidents of Pakistan and Afghanistan have come together to negotiate how to work more efficiently. Turkey made great contributions to the development of cooperation, especially between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Finally, it happened for the first time that the President of General Staff, intelligence organizations and the Presidents of these three countries came together in Ankara. I believe that these things will all bring about good results. 

The security and stability in Caucasus are important to all of us. If stability is not established in the Caucasus, the Caucasus is like a wall which separates the East and the West. On the contrary, if there is a solution and stability in this region, the Caucasus can turn out to be an area in which cooperation extensively flourishes. The events in Georgia indicated that the frozen problems can always explode and they can cause important consequences. Think about it, if the Montreux Agreement had not been completely implemented during the war in Georgia, if huge ships had entered the small Black Sea, and they had confronted there, clashing as the planes in a conflict, what would have come about? For this reason, Turkey continues its policy with principles. Some courageous steps have been taken to reach the solutions of the Caucasus’ problems. In this sense, I hope that the normalization process which has been launched with Armenia will be concluded. In the same way, the Caucasus is another reality, and indeed, the territories of Azerbaijan are occupied. I would like to say regarding this issue that there are various debates on Karabagh, but these territories of Azerbaijan belong to this country without any doubt. In this regard, there are not any claims from the Armenian side to be in question. In this respect, the attempts which focus on the evacuation of these territories under invasion, I believe, will easily solve many problems there. 

The point making me content is that the workings of the Minsk group, which have been going on in silence and at a low level for the past 18 years, have recently come to the agenda of President Medvedev and Obama within the last year with the politics that Turkey also followed, and they have been conducted at their level. In my opinion, both of these countries, Azerbaijan and Armenia are content with this. 

Dear Guests, 
Opening ten new embassies and staffing them demonstrates the most significant signs of Turkey’s activity in Africa. The historical ties with Africa are being revived. Our relations with Africa take its roots from human relations beyond trade, finance, and politics. I believe that everyone is responsible for Africa. Africa’s resources have been transferred for ages. Now, everyone should pay its dues back to Africa. In early ages, we did not have the possibility to reach information on the living standards of Africa since we did not have internet and television, as I mentioned at the beginning of my speech. We did not know the grievances of children and women there. Yet it is impossible to be kept in that way in this age. There is bitterness in one side, but happiness on the other. Thus, everyone should show an undivided interest in Africa without losing time. Turkey indicates its responsibility towards Africa. TIKA has significant efforts in Africa. It is my belief that this policy pursued by Turkey is always appreciated by the international community. 

Needless to say, all these are being expressed sufficiently, as I previously mentioned, by the government commissioners. Yet, there is a strong civilian influence in these discussions, from journalists to scientists to researchers. 

Beyond a doubt, this is not meant to direct you, you will surely state your own, uninfluenced, opinions. While discussing sensitive issues, you will advise Turkey on what is going on all around the world for the purposes of conveying information in the best way. In this regard, I am so happy that think tanks are being established and are developing in Turkey. Within this framework, I came here with this perception. Maybe this is a small building and you may be a limited number, but I believe that you will grow rapidly in a short time period and new organizations will be established by following your example. 

First of all, I would like to thank those who have contributed to you. These things could not have been accomplished without financial support. There has been no government aid in these efforts; I would like to reaffirm this here. These are the fruits of the contributions of people who set their hearts on this job. I congratulate you and all your contributors. 
We, of course, follow you closely. From now on, most of you are not only members of this organization but also journalists and inevitable contributors to television talks. You both enlighten the people and give messages to specific people you wish to reach. Here, this is what open society means. I mention these things while saying that Turkey’s soft power is growing stronger and representing an example. I strongly believe in this. In most of my lectures, I always reiterated what makes a country powerful. First of all, its democracy should be strong, undoubtedly. Its democracy, in its broad meaning soft power, should be open; law should be open and transparent and clear. There will not be a differentiation between domestic-foreign but just-unjust. Everyone will be equal. It will apply to all areas of commercial law, human rights, and all others. Turkey makes significant progress towards these matters. Under these circumstances, the economy would certainly be strengthened. Today we naturally realize it. Democratic reforms and legal reforms are the major causes behind Turkey’s gradually growing economy. 

Without a doubt, the Turkish Armed Forces, of which we are proud, gives weight to Turkey’s power. I would like to underline that the Turkish Armed Forces and security forces play a major role in Turkey’s status as a crucial ally. It would be impossible to make the aforementioned foreign policy moves and have accomplishments abroad if Turkish democracy, economy and armed forces were not strong enough. Thus, internal matters are the deep motive behind everything. Possessing an orderly powerful home lies behind everything. Providing this order is not the responsibility or duty of anyone but ourselves. I believe that all the discussions are developing in ways that will make Turkey much stronger and everyone will witness this.


I again wish you good luck, thank you.
Washington, DC - As part of The Turkish Coalition of America’s ongoing efforts to expand educational exchanges between the United States and universities in Turkey, TCA is pleased to sponsor a Native American Lecture Tour in November.  The tour coincides with the White House conference with the Native American Tribal Nations on November 5.

“For the last two years, TCA has been working with institutes of higher learning (including Tribal Colleges) in the US and universities throughout Turkey to establish scholarship opportunities, partnerships for academic exploration, and friendships between higher learning institutions,” said G. Lincoln McCurdy, President of the TCA.  “We hope that these efforts will advance both educational and cultural understanding between our nations.  TCA is proud to conduct this program with the support of the American Indian Higher Educational Consortium.”



The tour will bring educators from Mandaree, Hopi, Isleta/San Juan Pueblo and Mohawk tribes from South Dakota State University, Northern Arizona University and Institute of American Indian Arts to 12 universities in four cities in Turkey and will conclude with a Native American Conference at Hacettepe University in Ankara.

Other participating Turkish universities include Ondokuz Mayis University in Samsun, Abant Izzet Baysal University in Bolu, Bahcesehir, Bogazici, Halic, Istanbul Technical University, Koc, Ozyegin and Sabanci University in Istanbul and Bilkent and Middle East Technical University in Ankara.  

The tour aims to expose Turkish educators and students to different Native American cultures and customs. The tour will also explore opportunities to establish future collaboration between Tribal Colleges and other institutions with Native American programs in the US and institutions of higher education in Turkey.

TCA will be promoting its Study Abroad in Turkey Scholarship Program for American Minority Students during the tour. TCA awards up to 100 scholarships per year for eligible American minority students, including Native Americans, who have been accepted to a university in Turkey or in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC).


The Native American Conference, organized by the Department of American Culture and Literature at Hacettepe University, will last two days. The conference will explore topics of cultural survival through Native American literature and the arts.

About the Turkish Coalition of America

The Turkish Coalition of America (TCA) is an educational, charitable organization incorporated in February 2007. Based in the nation's capital, TCA's objective is to educate the general public about Turkey and Turkish Americans and voice their opinion on critical issues to interested parties; engage and cultivate a new generation of young Turkish American leaders; promote and advance the interests of the Turkish American community and Turks; foster friendship, understanding and cooperation between the United States and Turkey; protect the character and ensure a realistic portrayal of Turkey and Turkish Americans in the media and the arts; serve as a think tank of expertise and a clearinghouse of information on Turkey and Americans of Turkish descent. For more information please visit http://www.tc-america.org.

 

 

 

 
 	
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Fernandez to Visit Turkey
 	
Erdogan Issues Message Celebrating Rosh Hashanah of Jewish Citizens
 	
Erdogan Says Peace-Keeping Organizations Say Nothing to Greek Cypriots
 	
Turkey's EU Minister Accuses Greek Cypriots Of Provoking
 	
Turkish Military Orchestra’s March in LA Causes Armenian Protest
 	
Gazan Mothers Longing For Their Children
 	
Turkish FM: We Don't Have Eye On Any Country's Natural Richness
 	
UEFA European Champions League: Trabzonspor 1 - Lille 1
 	
Turkish Premier Receives U.S. Lawmaker
 
 	
Turkish FM Chairs ECO Meeting in New York
 	
Davutoglu Submits To UN Ratification On Optional Protocol To Anti-Torture Convention
 	
Turkish FM meets Iranian counterpart
 	
Turkish Foreign Minister Meets With UN Secretary General
 	
Bagis Says Stonewalling Cyprus Deal Would Have Consequences
 	
Turkish Cypriot, Greek Cypriot Leaders Meet in UN-Brokered Reunification Talks
 	
Top Turkish Diplomat Meets Lebanese Premier, Foreign Minister
 	
Turkish President Receives U.S. Lawmaker
 	
FM Davutoglu Receives Iraqi Kurdistan Democratic Party Official
 
 	
Washington DC’s ‘Best Festival’ Returns To Freedom Plaza
 	
U.S. President Honors Turkish Scientist With Award
 	
“Neighboring Countries' Should Increase Tension On Al-Assad”
 	
Turkish Foreign Minister Meets Officials in New York
 	
British Secretary: Turkey Is a Story of Success
 	
Turkish Foreign Minister Hosts CICA Meeting
 	
Turkish Foreign Minister Continues Talks In New York
 	
Turkish and Iraqi Foreign Ministers Meet In New York
 	
USD Climbs to All-Time High Against TL
 
TurkishNY Photo Gallery
 
Ilk Milli Hayalet Gemi Göreve Basladi
 
Rihanna “We Found Love” Sarkisina Klip Çekti
 
Deron Williams'li Kartal Kanatlandi
 
Filenin Sultanlari Çeyrek Finalde
 
Ilk ''Plastik Boeing'' Tokyo'ya Indi
 
Lindsay Lohan Modellige Iyice Isindi
Related Topics:
PM Erdogan Sends Letter to Greek Counterpart
Van To Be Industrial and Commercial Capital Linking East and West
Turkish Foreign Minister to Visit Paris
FM Davutoglu Meets Malaysian Counterpart
We Should Not Forget Turkey's Contributions To EU, President Gul
EU Economic Report Sees Fastest Growth For Turkey In Europe
Israeli Envoy Believes Ties Will Strengthen Again
Turkey Eager to Do Business in South Africa, Minister Caglayan
Turkish Foreign Minister in Kuala Lumpur
Turkey's Present Status Ahead Of A Limited Membership, Gul
Washington, DC - As part of The Turkish Coalition of America’s ongoing efforts to expand educational exchanges between the United States and universities in Turkey, TCA is pleased to sponsor a Native American Lecture Tour in November.  The tour coincides with the White House conference with the Native American Tribal Nations on November 5.

“For the last two years, TCA has been working with institutes of higher learning (including Tribal Colleges) in the US and universities throughout Turkey to establish scholarship opportunities, partnerships for academic exploration, and friendships between higher learning institutions,” said G. Lincoln McCurdy, President of the TCA.  “We hope that these efforts will advance both educational and cultural understanding between our nations.  TCA is proud to conduct this program with the support of the American Indian Higher Educational Consortium.”



The tour will bring educators from Mandaree, Hopi, Isleta/San Juan Pueblo and Mohawk tribes from South Dakota State University, Northern Arizona University and Institute of American Indian Arts to 12 universities in four cities in Turkey and will conclude with a Native American Conference at Hacettepe University in Ankara.

 
 

